MARCH # All Stories New and Complete Publisher Editor IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., Kingston, New York. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc. Application for Entry' as Second Class matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York, pending. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions: Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Aiiow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction. Any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. #c a fcopy. Printed ia U.S. A. A chat with the editor  i #  science fiction magazine called IF. The title was selected after much thought because of its brevity and on the theory it is indicative of the field and will be easy to remember. The tentative title that just morning and couldn't remember it until we'd had a cup of coffee, it was summarily discarded. A great deal of thought and effort lias gone into the formation of this magazine. We have had the aid of several very talented and generous people, for which we are most grateful. Much is due them for their warmhearted assistance. And now that the bulk of the formative work is done, we will try to maintain IF as one of the finest books on the market.  t a great public demand for our magazine. In short, why will you buy IF? We cannot, in honesty, say we will publish at all times the best science fiction in the field. That would not be true. But we will have access to the best stories, and we will get our fair share of works from the best writers. We definitely will not talk "adult" or "juvenile" relative to our content as we feel such terms are misleading. We would rather think at all times in the terms of "story". Some of the greatest escapist literature ever written, Treasure Island for instance, could be put into either category or both. And if Edgar Rice Burroughs is juvenile, then so are we, because the late master has given us some memorable thrills. Frankly, we don't think you'll buy IF because you feel we print better yams than any other mag. You will buy it, we hope, because you like its personality. Every magazine, we feel, does have a definite personality of its own. This personality is usually a reflection of the editors, their way of thinking, their appreciation of tKe market, their interpretation of what you will like best in stories and artwork. We have tried to make IF different from any other science fiction magazine on the stands while still building it along the lines of what every science fiction mag must be. Aside from the letter columns and the editorial, which are departments of field-wide use, we have not copied any feature of any other magazine. We will not, for instance, review fanzines, because we feel that is being most ably done by other mags. Nor will we, as a general practice, review books because that appears to us to be overdone. a personality of our own and hope thereby to establish an affinity with a large number of readers who will remember IF when they buy a science fiction mag as one they like and wish to continue reading. At all times we will hew to the story-line and will exhort with our writers to do the same. As an example, when Howard Browne phoned to talk over the plot for his lead novel in this issue, he described what ivas without doubt a staggering premise, a really startling concept. "But," he mourned, S T suppose I'll have to bend it around to give them the good old conventional ending." We told Howard, "Not for IF, chum. Remember the old creed we live by. A writer may cheat on his wife, but he is ever true to the story-line. He may haul his infant son around by one leg. but he carries a good story-idea like a holy relic. If there is only one logical ending for Twelve Times ZerG, that's the ending we want." Therefore, we do not feel the majority of readers necessarily want a happy ending regardless of all else. Not when it is incompatable with the aura of realism created by the writer. A check-list of fiction masterpieces certainly bears this out. The furor created by a little piece called Sorry , Wrong Number would certainly not have been forthcoming had the bedridden lady been rescued in the last paragraph. Romeo and Juliet would have beep nothing more than the smooth effort of the world's greatest writer if Romeo had gotten there in time. Yet, in modern fiction, he gets there in time with such amazing regularity one feels he has memorized at least  a dozen time-tables. The result has been unnumbered carloads of mediocre fiction. Also -- though we don't wish to underscore the point too heavily -- what could more surely have smothered the greatness of Wuthering Heights than a happy ending?  that IF will be a magazine given over to tragedy. W e will only insist that our writers create scenes and climaxes that fix the story rather than cater to that old "debil" formula. And in so doing we have an entirely selfish motive. This: As the years go by, we want to look back with personal pride upon an everlengthening list of great stories. So the book you now hold in your hands is a new one titled IF. We hope you will like it -- not for just a day -- not for just a month. But for years to come. pwf  Police grilled him mercilessly # while eyes from a hundred worlds looked on  It was a love-triangle murder that made today's headlines but the answer lay hundreds of thousands of light years away! one of the basement rooms. He moved slowly and with a kind of painful dignity, as a man moves on his way to the firing squad. A rumpled shock of black hair pointed up the extreme pallor of a gaunt face, empty at the moment of all expression. Harsh light from an overhead fixture winked back from tiny beads of perspiration dotting the waxen skin of his forehead. The three men with him watched him out of faces as expressionless as his own. They were ordinary men who wore ordinary clothing in an ordinary way. yet in the way they moved and in the w r ay they stood you knew they were I hard men who were in a hard and largely unpleasant business. One of them motioned casually toward a straight-backed chair almost exactly in the center of the room. "Sit there, Cordell  I he said.  A quiet voice, not especially deep, yet its seemed to bounce off the painted concrete walls. Wordless, the young man obeyed. Sitting, he seemed as stiff and uncompromising as before. The man who had spoken made a vague gesture and the overhead light  went out, replaced simultaneously by strong rays from a spotlight aimed full at the eyes of the seated figure. Involuntarily the young man's head turned aside to avoid came out of the wall of darkness and jerked it back again. # 'Just to remind you , # the quiet voice continued conversationally, "I'm Detective Lieutenant Kirk, Homicide Bureau . # A pair of hands thrust 'a second chair toward the circle of light. Kirk swung it around and dropped onto the seat, resting his arms along the back, facing the man across a distance of hardly more than inches. In the pitiless glare of the spotlight CordelPs cheekbones  stood out sharply, and under his deepset eyes were dark smudges of exhaustion. His rigid posture, his blank expression, his silence -- these were laid out, our first idea was to stage the scoop of the century: Get the lead novel from Howbe given an infant publication than Browne's name on the cover. We asked Howard and he asked bis boss, Mr. Davis, and Mr. Davis said, "Sure." oldest science-fiction publication in the world. It has the largest circulation in its field and up to January # th (the day IF went on the science fiction magazine your money could buy. It has the best writers in the field. Its departments are exfanzine reviews and Sam Merwin reviewing the books. So if you have a spare quarter, get a copy of And now, about Howard Browne. He is a huge man, made up almost entirely of vast enthusiasms. We have known Howard intimately for about six years and we continue to regard him with awe. There is no middle ground with this man. When he likes something, it's terrific If Howard hung a picture in his office we doubt if it would be a casual chore. The hammer he used would be a terrific hammer. The tack he drove would outshade other tacks by five country miles. And the picture? Gad, what a masterpiece! Seriously, one has only fo view Browne's enthusiasm for living to know it for what it is -- a priceless gift. He has written unnumbered short stories and, under the name of John Evans, is the father of near future. We have watched him write several of his stories and he hurled himself into each with a zeal and a zest that sfunned us into a partial paralysis. So we give you Howard Browne, a hard fellow to classify ; an astounding mixture of Balzac, a ten-ton dynamo, and Peter Pan. But this above all -- a great guy.  seemed not so much indications of defiance as they did the result of some terrible and deepseated shock, "Let's go over it again, Cordell," Kirk said. The young man swallowed audibly against the silence. One of his hands twitched, came up almost to his face as though to shield hiseyes, then dropped limply back. "That light -- " he mumbled. " -- stays on , # Kirk said briskly. # The quicker you tell us the answers, the quicker we all relax. Okay?" Cordell shook his head numbly, not so much in negation as an effort to clear the fog from his tortured mind. T told you," he cried hoarsely. "What rpofe do you want? Yesterday I told you the whole thing." His voice began to border on hysteria. "What good's my trying to tell you if you won't listen? How's a guy supposed -- " "Then try telling it straight!" Kirk snapped. "You think you're fooling around with half-wits? Sure ; you told us. A crazy pack of goof-ball dreams about a blonde babe clubbing two grown people to death, then disappearing in a ball of blue light! You figure on copping a plea on insanity?" "It's the truth!" Cordell shouted. "As God hears me, it's true!" Suddenly he buried his face in his hands and long tearing sobs shook his slender frame. O ne of the other men reached out as though to drag the young man's face back into the withering rays of the spotlight, but Kirk motioned him away. Without haste the Lieutenant fished a cigar from the breast pocket of his coat and began almost leisurely to strip away its cellophane wrapper. A kitchen match burst into flame under the flick of a thumb nail and a cloud of blue tobacco smoke writhed into the cone of hot light. "Cordell," Kirk said mildly. Slowly the young man's shoulders stopped their shaking, and after a long moment his wan, tearstained face came back into the light. "I -- I'm sorry," he mumbled. Kirk waved away the layer of smoke hanging between them. He said wearily, "Let's try it once more. Step by step. Maybe this time... He let the sentence trail off, but the inference was clear. An expression of hopeless resignation settled over Cordell's features. "Where do you want me to start?" "Take it from five o'clock the afternoon it happened." The tortured man wet his lips. "Five o'clock was when my shift went off at the plant. The plant, in case you've forgotten, is the Ames Chemical Company, and I'm a foreman in the Dry Packaging department." "Save your sarcasm," Kirk said equably. "Yeah. I changed clothes and punched out around five-fifteen. Juanita had called me about four and said to pick her up at Professor Gilmore's laboratory," # At what time?" "No special time. Just when I could get out there. We were going to have dinner and take in a movie. iN'o particular picture; she said we'd pick one out of the paper at dinner " "Go on . # "Well, it must've been about quarter to six when I got out to the University. I parked in front of the laboratory wing and went in at the main entrance. I walked down the corridor to the Professors office. His typist was knocking out some letters and there were a couple of students hanging around waiting for him to show up. How about a smoke, Lieutenant?" Kirk nodded to one of the men behind him and a package of cigarettes was extended to the man under the light. A match was proffered and the young man ignited the white tube, his hands shaking badly. The Lieutenant crossed his legs the other way. "Let's hear the rest of it, friend." "What for?" Bitterness tinged Cordell's voice. "YoU don't believe a word I'm saying." "Up to now I do " "Well. I said something or other to Alma -- she's the Profs secretary -- and went on through the door to the hall that leads to the private lab. When I got -- #  K irk held up a hand. "Wait a minute. Your busting right in on the Professor like that doesn't sound right. Why not wait in the office for your wife?" "What for?" Cordell squinted at him in surprise. "He and I get... , got along fine. When Juanita first went to work for him he said to drop in at the lab any time, not to wait in the outer office like a freshman or something." "Go ahead." "Well... The young man hesitated. "We're back to the part you don't believe, Officer. I can't hardly believe it myself ; but so help me, it's gospel. I saw it!" "I'm waiting." Cordell said doggedly: "The lab door was open a crack. I heard a woman's voice in there, and . it wasn't my wife's. It was a voice like -- like cracked ice. You know: cold and kind of... well... brittle and -- and deadly. That's the only way I can describe it. "Anyway, I sort of hesitated there, outside the door. I didn't want to go bulling in on something that wasn't none of my business... but on the other hand I figured my wife was in there, else Alma would've said so." "You hear anything besides this collection of ice cubes?" ' The young man's jaw hardened. "I'm giving it the way it happened. You want the rest, or you want to trade wise cracks?" One of the men behind Kirk lunged forward. "Why, you cheap punk -- " Kirk stopped him with an arm. "I'll handle this, Miller." To Cordell: "I asked you a question. Answer it." "I heard Professor Gilmore. Only a couple words, then two quick flashes of light lit up the frosted glass door panel. That's when I heard these two thumps like when somebody falls down. I shoved open the door fast... and right then I saw her!" Kirk nodded for no apparent reason and was careful about knocking a quarter inch of ash off his cigar. "Tell me about her." The young man's hands were shaking again. He sucked at his cigarette and let the smoke come out with his words : "She was clear over on the other side of the lab... standing a good two feet off the floor in the middle of a big blue ball of some kind of -- of soft fire. Blue fire that sort of pulsed -- you know. Anyway, there she was: this hell of a good-looking blonde ; looking right smack at me, and there was this funny kind of gun in her hand. She aimed it and I ducked just as this dim flash of light came out of it. Something hit me on the side of the head and I... well, I guess I blanked out." "Then what?" "Well, like I said yesterday, I suppose I just naturally came out of it. I'm all spread out on the floor with the damndest headache you ever saw. Over by the window' is the Prof and -- " he wet his lips -- "and Juanita. They're dead. Lieutenant; just kind of all piled up over there... dead, their heads busted in and the -- the -- the -- " H e sat there, his mouth working but no sound coming out, his eyes staring straight into the blazing light, the cigarette smouldering, forgotten, between the first two fingers of his left hand. Almost gently Kirk said: "Let's go back to where you were standing outside the door. You heard this woman talking. What did she say?" Cordell looked sightlessly dowm at his hands. "Nothing that made sense. Sounded, near as I can remember, like: 'Twelve times zero' -- then some words, or more numbers maybe -- I'm not sure -- then # she said, 'Chained to a two hundred thousand years' -- and the Professor said something about his colleges having no idea and he'd warn them -- and the blonde said, 'Three in the past five months' -- and then something about taking in washing -- " ' The detective named Miller gave a derisive grunt. "Of all the goddam stories! Kirk, you gonna listen to any -- " Kirk silenced him with a gesture. "Go on, Cordell" The young man slowly lifted the cigarette to his mouth, dragged heavily on it, then let it fall to the floor. "That's all. That's when the lights started flashing in there and I tried to be a hero." "Sure you've left nothing out?" "You've got it all. The truth, like you wanted." Kirk said patiently, "Give it up, Cordell. You're as sane as the next guy. Give that story to a jury and they'll figure you're trying to make saps out of them -- and when a jury gets sore at a defendant, he gets the limit. And in case you didn't know: in this State, the limit for murder is the hot seat!" The prisoner stared at him woodenly. "You know I didrPt kill my wife -- or Professor Gilmore. I had no reason to -- no motive. There's got to be a motive. The police officer rubbed his chin reflectively. "Uh-hunh. Motive. How long you married, Cordell?" "Six years." "Children?" "No." "Ames Chemical pay you a good salary ?" "Enough." "Enough for two to live on?" "Sure" "How long did your wife work for Professor Gilmore?" "Four years next month." "What was her job?" "His assistant." "Pretty big job for a woman, wasn't it?" "Juanita held two degrees in nuclear physics." "You mean this atom bomb stuff?" "That was part of it." "Gilmore's a big name in that field, I understand." Kirk said. "Maybe the biggest." "Kind of young' to rate that high, wouldn't you say? He couldn't have been much past forty." Cordell shrugged. "He was thirty-eight -- and a genius. Genius has nothing to do with age, I hear." "Not married, I understand." "That's right..." A slow frown was forming on Cordell's face. "How old was your wife?" Kirk asked. The frown deepened but the young man answered promptly enough. "Juanita was my age. Twenty-nine." Martin Kirk eyed his cigar casually. "Why," he said, "did you want her to walk out on her job; to give up her career?" Cordell stiffened. "Who says I did?" he snapped. "Are you denying it?" "You're damn well right I'm denying it! What is this?" K irk was slowly shaking his head almost pityingly. "On at least two occasions friends of you and your wife have heard you say you wished she'd stay home where she belonged and cut out this 'playing around with a mess of test tubes? Those are your own words, Cordell." "Every guy," the young man retorted, "who's got a working wife says something like that now and then. It's only natural." Kirk's jaw hardened. "But every guy's wife doesn't get murdered." The other looked at him unbelievingly. "Good God," he burst out, "are you saying I killed Juanita because I wanted her to stop working? Of all the -- " "There's, more!" snapped the Homicide man. "When you passed Professor Gilmore's secretary in his outer office yesterday, what did you say to her?" " 'Say to her?' " 'the, prisoner echoed in a dazed way. "I don't know that #... Some kidding remark, I guess. How do you expect me to remember a thing like that?" "I'll tell you what you said," Kirk said coldly. "It goes like this: 'Hi, Alma. You think the Prof's through making love to my wife?' " Cordell's head snapped back and h!s jaw dropped in utter amazement. "What! Of all -- ! You nuts ? I never said anything like that in my life! Who says I said that?" Without haste Kirk slid a hand into the inner pocket of his coat and brought out two folded sheets of paper which he opened and spread out on his knee. "Listen to this, friend," he said softly. " 'My name is Miss Alma Dakin. I reside at # Monroe Street, and arn employed as secretary to Professor Gregory Gilmore. At approximately # : # on the afternoon of October #, Paul Cordell, husband of Mrs. Juanita Cordell, laboratory assistant to Professor Gilmore, passed my desk on his'way into the laboratory. I made no effort to stop him, since my employer had previously instructed me to allow Mr. Cordell to go directly to the laboratory at any time without being announced.' " Kirk looked up at the man in the chair opposite him. "Okay so far?" t Paul Cordell nodded numbly. " 'At the time stated above,' " Kirk continued, reading from the paper, " 'Mr. Cordell stopped briefly in front of my desk. He seemed very angry about something. He said, "Hi, Alma. You think the Prof's through making love to my wife?" Before I could say anything, he turned away and walked into the corridor leading to the laboratory. I continued my work until about five minutes later when Mr. Cordell came running back into the office and told me to call the police, that Professor Gilmore and Mrs. Cordell had been murdered. " 'Since there is an automatic closer on the corridor door, I did not see Mr. Cordell enter the laboratory' itself. I do "know, however, that Professor Gilmore and Mrs. Cordell w r ere alone in the laboratory less than ten minutes before Mr. Cordell arrived, as I had just left them alone there after taking some dictation from my employer. Since I went directly to my desk, and since there is no entrance to the laboratory other than through my office, I can state with certainty that Mr. Cordell was the only person to enter the laboratory between #:# that afternoon and # : # when Mr. Cordell came out of the laboratory and told me of the murders. " 'I hereby depose that this is a true and honest statement, to the best of my knowledge, that it was given freely on my part, and that I have read it before affixing my signature to its pages. Signed: Alma K. Dakin.' " T here was an almost ominous crackle to the document as Lieutenant Kirk folded it and returned it to his pocket. Paul Cordell appeared utterly stunned by what he had heard and his once stiffly squared shoulders were slumped like those of an old man. "I don't have to tell you," Kirk said, "that the only window in that laboratory is both permanently sealed and heavily barred. No one but you could have murdered those two people. You say you saw them killed by some kind of a gun. Yet a qualified physician states both deaths were caused by a terrific blow from a blunt instrument We found a lot of tilings around the lab you could have used to do the job -- -but nothing at all of anything like a projectile fired from a gum" The prisoner obviously wasn't listening, "B -- but she -- she lied!" he stammered wildly. "All I said to Alma Dakin was a couple of words -- three or four at the most -- about not working too hard. Why should she put me on a spot like that? I just -- don't -- get -- it! Why should she go out of her way to make trouble... Dawning suspicion replaced his bewilderment. "I get it! You cops put her up to this; that's it! You need a fall guy and I'm "Listen to me, Cordell," Kirk cut in impatiently. "You knew, or thought you knew, your wife was having an affair with Professor Gilmore. You tried to break it up, to get her to leave her job. She wasn't having any of that; and the more she refused, the sorer you got. Yesterday you walked in on them unannounced, found them in each other's arms, and knocked them  both off in a jealous rage. When you cooled down enough to see what you'd done, you invented this wild yarn about a blonde in a ball of fire, hoping to get off on an insanity plea." "I want a lawyer!" Cordell shouted. Kirk ignored the demand. "You're going back to your cell for a couple hours, buster. Think this over. When you're ready to tell it right, I want it in the form of a witnessed statement, on paper. If you do that, if you co-operate with the authorities, you can probably get off with a fairly light sentence, maybe even an outright acquittal, on the old 'unwritten law' plea. I don't make any promises. Gilmore was a prominent man and a valuable one; that might influence a jury against you. But it's the only chance you've got -- and I'm telling you, by God, to take, it!" Cordell was standing now, his face working. "Sure; I get it! All you're after is a confession. What do you care if it's a flock of lies? My wife wouldn't even look at another man, and not you or anybody else is going to make me say different. That blonde killed them, I tell you -- and I'll tell a jury the same thing! They'll believe me; they're not a bunch of lousy framing cops! You'll find out who's -- " Lieutenant Martin Kirk wearily ground out his cigar against the chair rung. "All right, boys. Take him back upstairs." Chapter II I T was a gray chill day late in November, and. by #:# that afternoon the ceiling lights were on. Chenowich, the young plainclothes man recently transferred to Homicide from Robbery Detail, stopped at Martin Kirk's cubbyhole and slid an evening paper across the battered brown linoleum top of the Lieutenant's desk. "This oughta interest you # he said, jabbing a chewed thumbnail at an item under a two-column m  the left # s er of Wife and Atom Wizard .  , was today Criminal Court Justice P. Reed to death by electrode morning of January #, the murders of his wife, Juan#, and her employer, worldfamous nuclear scientist Gregory more. A jury last week found Cordell uilty of the brutal slayings despite his testimony that it was a mysterious blonde woman, floating in a "ball of blue fire," who had blasted the victims with a "ray gun" on that October afternoon. Ignoring the "girl from Mars" angle, alienists for the prosecution pronounced the handsome defendant sane, and his attorneys were powerless to offset the damage. The final blow to Cordell's hopes for acquittal, however, was administered by the State's key witness, Alma Dakin, Gilmore's former secretary. For more than three hours she underwent one of the most cal courtroom ,  .  Kirk shoved the' paper aside. "What could he expect when he wouldn't even listen to his own lawyers? They'll appeal -- they have ut it'll he a wastp of time." # leaned back in the creaking d chair and began to unwrap am a cigar. "In a le said thoughtfully, "I up inthe fireless you get so gnize an act when you swear Cordell blonde and he thought he was nuts then What do them I never seen one his own fingers." The telephone on desk rang while he was ligh cigar. Pie tossed the match floor to join a. dozen picked up the receiver. " Lieutenant Kirk speakin It was the patrolman outer office. "Woman out here wants to see you,. Lieutenant. Asked for you personally. "What about?" "She won't say. All I get is it's important and she talks to you or nobody." "What's her name?" "No, sir. Not even that... Want me to get rid of her?" Kirk eyed the mound of paper work on his desk and sighed. "Probably a taxpayer. All right; send her back here." A moment later the patrolman loomed up outside the cubbyhole door, the woman in tow. Lieutenant Kirk remained seated, nodded briskly toward the empty chair alongside his desk. "Please sit down, madam. You wanted to see me?" "You are Mr. Kirk?" A warm voice, almost on the husky side, "Lieutenant Kirk." "Of course. I am sorry." . ful about Kirk stared was worth for a voluptuous by exactly the right margin. Her face was more lovely than beautiful, chiefly because of large eyes so blue they were almost purple. Her skin was flawless, her blonde hair worn in a medium bob fluffed out, and hersmooth fitting tobacco brown suit must have been bought by appointment. She looked to he in her mid-twenties and was probably thirty. Her expression was solemn and her smile fleeting,, as was becoming to anyone calling on a Homicide Bureau. She placed on a corner of Kirk's desk an alligator bag that matched her shoes and tucked ple yellow gloves the color of her blouse under the bag's strap. Her slim fingers, ringless, moved competently and without haste. a I am Naia North, Lieutenant Kirk." "What's on your mind, Miss North?" She regarded him gravely, seeing gray-blue eyes that never quite lost their chill, a thin nose bent slightly to the left from an encounter with a drunken longshoreman years before, the lean lines of a solid jaw, the dark hair that was beginning to thin out above the temples after thirty-five years. Even those who love him, she thought, must fear this man a little. Martin Kirk felt his cheeks flush under the frank appraisal of those purple eyes. "You asked for me by name, Miss North. Why?" "Aren't you the officer who arrested the young man who today was sentenced to die?" Only years of practise at letting nothing openly surprise him kept Kirk's jaw from dropping...You mean Cordell?" "Yes." "I'm the one. What about it? What've you got to do with Paul Cordell?"... Naia North said quietly, "A great deal, I'm afraid. You see, I'm the woman who doesn't exist; the one the newspapers call 'the girl from Mars.'" It was what he had expected fronuher first question about the case. Any murder hitting the headlines brought at least one psycho out of the woodwork, driven by some deep-seated sense of guilt into making a phony confession. Those who were harmless were eased aside; the violent got detained for observation. But Naia North showed none of the signs of the twisted mind. She was coherent, attractive and obviously there was money somewhere in her vicinity. While the last two items could have been true of a raving maniac, Kirk was human enough to be swayed by them. "I'm afraid," he said, "you've come to the wrong man about this, Miss North." His smile was frank and winning enough to startle her. "The case is out of my hands; has been since the District Attorney's office took over. Why don't you take it up with them?" H er short laugh was openly cynical. "I tried to, the day the trial ended. I got as far as a fourth assistant, who told me the case was closed, that new and conclusive evidence would be necesI exolf date, ive him new "We met sever a! fell in love, I #... and after tired of play in wanted him his secretary promavoided me." wanted me to write a letter. So Y. T waiting for an answer." s take time. Miss I were vou Pd -- " r even tried to see Judge Reed, far as his bailiff. If Pd state my business in writing... I did; that's the last Pve heard from Judge Reed or bailiff. #  Kirk picked up his cigar from the edge of the desk and tapped the ash onto the floor. "Shall I," he said, his lips quirking, "ask you to write me a letter?" Naia North failed to respond to the light touch. "Pm through filling wastebaskets," she said flatly. "Either you do something about this or the newspapers get the entire story. Not that I'll enjoy being a public spectacle, but at least they'll give me some action." "What do you want done?" She put both elbows on the desk and bent toward him. He caught the faint odor of bath salts from under the rounded s of her blouse. "That man ieutenant. He didn't or Gregory Gilmore." I   "So you decide She seemed genuine! at the remark. "C when I saw him take this assistant  of his, or she was -- into his arms . pose I 'went a little crazy," "Now," Kirk said, "we're down to cases. You know the evidence given at the trial -- particularly that given by Gilmore's secretary ?"  "Of course." "Then .you know this Dakin woman was in the laboratory until a few minutes before Cordell showed up. You know that nobody could have gone into that laboratory without her seeing them. You know that Alma Dakin testified that there were only two people in there: Gilmore and Juanita Cordell. So, Miss North, how did you get in there after Alma Dakin and before Paul Cordell arrived?" "But I didn't." The Lieutenant's air sagged under 'D# a # What do you mean "I didn't enter "# after Greg's secretary I t into his eyes. there all along . a traightened and her gaze haven't tunelessly. "You  "I was girl repeated exact. I p# everybody would be out to lunch between twelve and one, so I went to the laboratory with the intention of facing Greg there on his return. When I heard him and Mrs. Cordell coming along the corridor, I sort of lost my nerve and hid in a coat closet." Martin Kirk had completely dropped bis air of good-humored patience by this time. "You telling me you were hiding in there for almost five hours without them knowing it?" Naia North shrugged her shoulders. "They had no reason to look in the closet. I'll admit I hadn't intended to -- to spy on Greg. But I kept waiting for him to say or do something that would prove or disprove he was in love with Juanita Cordell, and not until his secretary left and he was alone with her did I discover what was between them. I must have come out of that dark hole like a tiger. Lieutenant. They jumped apart and v two people never looked guiltier. He said something particularly nasty to me and I grabbed up a short length of shiny metal from the workbench and hit him across the side of the head before lie knew what was happening. He fell down and the Cordell woman opened her mouth to scream and -- and I hit her too." She paused as though to permit Kirk to comment. "Go on." he said hoarsely. "There's not much left " the girl said. "I was standing there still holding that piece of metal when the door crashed open and the dead woman's husband ran in. He started to lunge across the. room at me and I threw the thing I was holding at hiim It struck him and he fell down. My only thought was to hide, for I realized I couldn't go out through the outer office, and the only window was barred. So I hid in that closet again. "It was onlya few minutes before Paul Cordell regained consciousness. He staggered out of the room and down the hall and I could hear a lot of excited talk and Greg's secretary calling the police. Then I didn't hear anything at all for a moment, so I came out of the closet and looked down the hall. The office door was closed, but it seemed so quiet in there that I tiptoed quickly to the inner door, opened it a crack and peered through. The office was deserted; evidently Cordell and Miss Dakin had gone out to direct the police when they showed up. "When I saw there was no one in the main hall of the building itself, I simply walked out and left by another exit. No one I passed even noticed me." F or a long time after Naia North had finished speaking, Martin Kirk sat as though carved from stone, staring blindly into space. She knew he was thinking furiously, weighing the plausibility of what he had heard, trying to arrive at some method of corroborating it in a way that would stand up in a court of law. "Miss North." She came out of a reverie with a start, to find the Lieutenant's eyes  boring Into hers. "This shiny hunk of metal you used : where is it now?", "Fra sure I wouldn't know. Probably some place in the laboratory, unless somebody took it away. I do seem to remember picking it up and tossing it back with several others like it on the bench." "Then it's still there," he said slowly. "Judge Reed ordered the room sealed up until after the trial. And then there's the closet... , . Were you wearing gloves that afternoon, Miss North?" She said, "No. You're thinking of fingerprints?" "If you're telling the truth," he said, "there's almost certain to be some of your prints on the inside of that closet door -- maybe even on that length of metal, if we can find it." She said almost carelessly: "That's all you'd need to clear Paul Cordell, isn't it?" "It would certainly help." He swung around in the chair, scooped up the telephone and gave a series of rapid-fire orders, then dropped the instrument on its cradle and turned back to where she sat watching him curiously. He said, "A few things I still don't get. Like this business of your standing two feet off the floor in a ball of blue light. And the flashes of light just before Cordell heard his wife and Gilmore fall to the floor. Even the snatches of conversation he caught while still in the hall. He couldn't have dreamed all that stuff up -- at least not without some basis." She had opened her bag and taken out a cigarette. Kirk ignited one of his kitchen matches and she i bent her head for a light. He could see the flawless curve of one cheek and the smooth cap of blonde hair, and he resisted the urge to pass a hand lightly across both. Something was stirring inside the Lieutenant -- something that had long been absent. And, he reflected wryly, all because of a girl who had just finished confessing to two particularly unpleasant murders. Naia North raised her head and their eyes met -- met and held. Her lips parted slightly' as she caught the unmistakable message in those gray-blue depths... The moment passed, the spell was broken and she leaned back in  the chair and laughed a little shakily. "I read about those statements of his in the papers, Lieutenant. I think perhaps I can at least partially explain them. As I remember it, there were several Bunsen burners lighted on the laboratory bench near that window'. They give off a blue flame, you know, and I must have been standing near them when Paul Cordell came charging in. In his confused frame of mind, he may have pictured me as being in a ball of flame." "Sounds possible," the man admitted, frowning. "What about those flashes of light?" "You've got me there. Unless they were reflections of sunlight through the window -- from the windshield of a passing car, perhaps." "And the things he heard you and Gilmore saying?" She shook her head regretfully. dark, I She went wit. in cruisers a hand slowly of his neck, 'He could have conof metal in your hand as a gun,... Well -- his shoulders lifted in the ghost of a shrug -- "it all seems to add up. Except one thing : Cordell had been tried and convicted, leaving you in the dear. Why come down here voluntarily and stick your lovely head in a noose?" The girl smiled faintly. " 'Lovely head, Lieutenant?" Kirk flushed to the eyebrows. "That slipped out... Why the confession?" She said soberly: "I was so sure they'd let him off. When you know someone's innocent you can't realize that others won't know it too, I But when I learned he'd been found guilty and actually condemned to die... well, I know it sounds noble and all that but I couldn't let him go to his death for d done. Surely such a before in your rienee. Lieutenant," .died as she drew smoke cigarette deeply into her . let it flow out in twin . Only # id into the Sherry# ' than a little cynica concerned with of them. That could kill -- and spur of the moment vocation was strong  "Well, Lieutenant?" lightly, almost with disinterest. Then Kirk was all right again, and he was looking at a woman who had just confessed to murder. You heard the phone call I made a moment ago, Miss North. Two men from the Crime Lab are already on their way to the University. If they find your fingerprints inside that closet, if they can. turn up anything to prove you've been in Gregory Gilmore's laboratory, then you and that evidence and your confession get turned over to the D. A. and Paul Cordell will be on his way to freedom." "And if those men don't anything?" "Then," he told her 'you're just another crackpot I'm tossing you and confession out of here," several perfect inner door of the But even JuSiZ...'ZbAJiWm   iv A    --  TTi  LT; k --   ja  ' w iA v -VA Vr VA' #e mar standing a good two feet off the floor in the middle of a glowing bubble that pulsed arid wavered around her .  -- at the other a micro tic trace of human blood. a  mess missing? it technician told a sworn we ast month. ot the prints -- the ones . Hey, how about that, Lieutenant? this . Cordell guy Slowly Kirk rep and eyed Naia desk from him, " " he said Cii ripia you straig going to any part of Her brow I don't   ic miscarriage that hes a misto get all tiie pubbound to? 'District innocent man! of  torials in the opposition press about a offices and voters must keep out anybody who goes around executing the innocent and helpless. Looks like Arthur Kahler Troy is going to be a mighty unpopular man around these parts -- and election less than five months away!" He glanced up at the office clock. It was nearly nine, o'clock in the evening, and 'both of them were showing signs of wear. Kirk left his chair and went over to the water and two cupfuls brought one back to the girl. She thanked him with a wan smile and d down the contents. empty paper conit slowly, et hold of him, # "It's going to be ty damned rough, sister. You through with eyebrow at him. question for a isn't sparsely moved slowly an in his step, and tures was harsh and strains soft light from Troy had been even more cult than he'd feared, begun as plain irritability a disturbed, had stages to amused disbelief, open anger and finally reluctant conviction that Paul Cordell was innocent of the crimes for which he had been sentenced to die. A male stenographer from Ms staff was' called in and Naia North dictated a complete statement which she signed. Troy questioned her for nearly two hours, getting in every possible angle of her private life as well as minute details of her actions on the day of the Kirk had not been present durin that part of the night, but he ured it wouldn't be much from what he'd heard many time; He mixed himself was surprised to discover hands were I Well, why not? A he'd just been the shakes in as he made the wasn't the  stayed been cases triggers -- and the shakes never came. No, it was the girl. Naia North. Naia -- a strange name. But no stranger than the girl herself. Now how about that? Why should he think her strange? Because she'd taken a life or two? Hell, lots of people did that and no one called them strange. Criminal or unmoral or greedy or angry, yes. But not strange. She looked like other women -- only a lot better. She dressed like them, walked like them, talked like them. So why strange? Because she was strange. Nothing you could put your finger on made her that way, but that's the way she was. He threw his cigar savagely into the fireplace. He went over and made another drink and poured it down fast and another one after it, right on its heels. Then he went to bed. Tomorrow -- today, rather -- was a work day and work days were tough days and he needed his rest. He didn't get much of it, though. The phone woke him a few minutes after seven o'clock. It was Arthur Kahler Troy at the other end and the IX A. was too angry to be coherent. It seemed Naia North had disappeared from her locked cell during the night. fifiT don't give a triple-distilled J, damn what you say!" Troy snarled. "Nobody's got enough money to make that kind of payoff. Five men,. Lieutenant -- five men and five locked doors stood between that girl and the street. And you sit there and try to tell me somebodybought all five of 'em off!" "Then," Kirk said heatedly, "what's your explanation?" It had been going on this way for over an hour. The morning sun came in weakly at the window behind Troy's huge polished mahogany desk, picking up random reflections from the collection of expensive gadgets littering the glass top. Troy began to wear another path in the moss-colored broadloom carpeting. He was big and broad and getting puffy around the middle, like a one-time halfback going to seed. His round, heavyfeatured face was even more .florid than usual, and his heavy growth of reddish-blond hair needed a comb. Martin Kirk pushed himself deeper into the depths of a brown leather chair and watched the D. A. through brooding eyes. He wanted a cigar but it was too early in the morning for that kind of inYou needed a breakfast and a couple cups of coffee before -- "I don't explain it," Troy said in quieter tones. He was standing by the window now, staring down into the boulevard passing that side of the Criminal Courts Building. "It's one of those tilings that make me think my sainted mother wasn't so wrong when she used to tell z elves and gnomes and I I chauns and fairies and -- # Kirk made a sound deep in his throat, "Naia North was a hell of a long way from being a leprechaun. Somebody wanted her out of here for some reason -- and they got her out. I want to know who took her out, why she was taken, and where she is now. And I'm going to find out the answers to all three if I have to turn this town on its ear." "Go ahead," Troy said, "Hop right to it and I wish you luck. Only leave me and my people out of it." "Seems to me you're mighty damned anxious to be left out." Arthur Kahler Troy turned on his heel and strode toward the Lieutenant until he was towering over him. "just what," he said between his teeth, "do you mean by that crack?" "Figure it out for yourself," Kirk snapped. "And I'm sure you can." Troy reared back as though the police officer had pulled a gun on him. "Why -- why you -- I'll have you busted for making a dirty insinu -- " "You couldn't bust a daisy chain at the police department," Kirk growled. "The Commissioner hates your guts and you know that as well as I do. Now let's cut out all this hokey-pokey and pick up a few loose ends. The first thing: what about Paul Cordell?" All the wide-eyed fury seemed to go out of Troy's face like water down the bathtub drain. He turned away and walked slowly back to his desk chair and sat down. He said, "What about Cordell' in a soft voice. "The morning paper," Kirk said, "reports he was taken up to Hillcrest last night. The warden out there's probably got him in Death Row already." "Uh-hunh." "Well, let's get him out of there. With the evidence we've got, plus Naia North's sworn statement, Judge Reed will have to bring him back down here and release him -- at least on bail until we can find the girl. The man's innocent, Mr. D. A.; have you forgotten?" "Yes." " 'Yes'? Yes, what?" "I've forgotten he's, innocent," Troy said quietly. "Matter of fact, he's guilty as hell" T he lieutenant half rose from his chair. "Now wait a minute! You heard that girl's story and you've got the evidence I turned over to you right here in this office last night. What more -- " "I'll tell you what more' Troy snapped. "That girl was a fraud, her story was a downright lie and that evidence was faked. Let me tell you something else, Mister: within five minutes after the guard downstairs reported your girl friend missing, I had five squads of my men out running down the personal information she gave me a few hours before. And you know what they found out?. Every bit of what she told me was false! Hear that? False! It took my men about one hour to prove as much, for the simple reason that not one lead And you from, that coat c Kirk ut a stranthis dame whole thing beyou to save CorWho could do a better g evidence than a A s more, you have gotten away with it, too -- only it suddenly dawned on the girl that she was getting in too deep. "And so Kirk cut in hotly, "she calmly walked through five locked sets of iron bars and went back to Mars!" He stood up and crossed to the desk and leaned down with his palms in the center of the brown blotter, "You won't get away with it, Troy. You didn't want any part of this new development from the minute I called you on the phone last night. You knew it could show you and your whole organization as a bunch of bunglers and inyou got rid of the that without her the of those murders would never et out to the voters. it won't work. Fatso! The up is strong enough case without Naia y ave to do is put that Judge Reed, U You ence. It's in over to you.' The D, A. was "We don't around here, my case is closed; the awaiting execution, along and tell the Ju it. Tell the newspapers, t delPs defense attorneys world for all I care. See touch it without somethin concrete than your highly ima native day dreams. For all you can prove, the girl might have confessed the whole thing was a hoax and we tossed her out of here last night. "I'm a busy man, Lieutenant, Good morning -- good luck -- and kindly close the door on your way out"    Chapter IV L ieutenant the pile of mimeograp pages aside. Three hours through the complete script of the Corde! ing to show for it and an aching hea it up, a sma back of his haven't got a as getting any  the fear of Go does that poor devil up in Death's Row. He drummed his fingers over and over on the arm of his chair and listened to the every-day sounds of a normal day at the Homicide Bureau. A new day, a new set of problems, and why knock yourself out over some tiling that doesn't concern you? Thing to do was go down to the comer tavern and have a couple of fast ones and watch an old movie on television. Yes sir, that's exactly what he'd do! He went back to the mimeographed pages. For the fourth time he read through Cordell's testimony of what had happened that October afternoon. And it was there that he came across the first possible break in the stone wall. Once more Martin Kirk went over the few lines, although by this time he could have come close to reciting them from memory. It was an excerpt from Arthur Kahler Troy's cross-examination of the defendant after Cordell's counsel, in a last desperate effort to swing the tide of a losing battle, had placed him on the stand. Q: (by Troy) : Now, Mr. Cordell, I direct your attention to the point in your testimony at which first entered Professor Gilmore's outer office. At what time was this? A: At about #:# p.m. Q: Who was in the office at that time? A: Alma Dakin, the Professor's secretary. And a couple of students -- although , they were at the other end of the room and I didn't pay much attention to them . Q: But you did pay attention, as you call it, to Miss Dakin? A: Well, I spoke to her, if that's what you mean. Q: That's exactly what I mean, Mr. Cordell. And what was it you said to her? A: Something about it was too late in the day to be working so hard. Q: That was all? A: Yes, sir. Q: Remember, Mr. Cordell, you're under oath. Now I ask you again : Was that all you said to her at that time? A: Yes, sir. Q: It isn't possible you've forgotten some additional remark? Think carefully, please. A: No, sir. That's all I said. I swear it. Q: Very well. Now how well do you know Miss Dakin? A: Just to speak to, Q: Have you ever seen her outside Professor Gilmore's office? A: No, sir. Q: Ever ask her for a date? A: 'No, sir. Q: Did you ever have an argument with her? A discussion of any kind that may have become a bit heated? A: No, sir. Q: Then to your knowledge she'd have no reason to dislike you? A: No, sir. Q: Very good. Now, Mr. Cordell, I want to read to you an excerpt from the testimony given by Miss Dakin in this court. "Mr. Cordell was looking very angry when he came in. He came up to me and bent down over the desk and said so low I could hardly hear him: 'Hi, Alma. You think the ProPs through making love to my wife?' " I now ask you, Paul Cordell, isn't that what you said to Alma Dakin? Not that shewas working too hard, or whatever it was you claimed to have said. A: No, sir. I didn't say anything like she said I did. I wouldn't insult my wife by saying such a thing to a third -- Q: Just answer the questions, Mr. Cordell. Then you contend that Miss Dakin deliberately lied in her testimony. A: She was mistaken. Q: Oh, come now! Miss Dakin is an intelligent girl; she couldn't misunderstand or twist your words to that extent. Now could she? A: Then she lied. I never said anything like that. Q: What reason would she have for lying, Mr. Cordell? By your own statement she hardly knew you, always greeted you pleasantly on the times you came to the office, never got into any arguments with you, and never saw you outside the office. She had worked for Professor Gilmore for five or six months, has excellent references, and is well liked by her friends. Yet you're asking us to believe that she coldly and deliberately lied to get you into trouble. Is that true? there all thought grimly, was innocent, then id the truth during the if he had told the truth to Alma Dakin, then, automatically, Alma Dakin's testimony was untrue. Kirk ran his fingers through his in a gesture of bafflement. What possible reason could Gilmore's secretary have for going out of her way to lie about Cordell's remark? Was it because she was so certain he had killed her employer that she wanted to make sure he would be punished? Or was it because she wanted to shield the real killer? Maybe she was a friend of Naia North's and had known the blonde girl was in Gilmore's laboratory all along. She might even have deliberately steered everyone out of her office after Cordell discovered the bodies, making it possible for Naia to slip out unseen. was a slender lead, but the y one large enough to get even ngernail grip on. He drew the over in front of him and , series of calls designated to more information about akin University took him of secretaries bethe right person. em? Why, of very decorne to the sity m only a day lins. Professor secretary, had Dakin's references had worked for i ret ary to Dr. co-discoverers of the (according to Miss Slife) been engaged to take place. Professor man, had been very the change and everybody was happy: Miss Collins at inheriting a very large sum of money from a relative she'd never even heard of, Miss Dakin at being able to get such a nice position, and dear Professor Gilmore at finding such a satisfactory replacement. When Miss Slife had run down, Kirk said, "This Dr. Karney. Why did Miss Dakin leave him?" The woman' at the other end of the wire seemed astonished by Kirk's ignorance. "Why, I assumed everybody knew about Dr. Karney. He died of a heart attack about eight months ago." What!" U , there's no need shout, Mr. Kirk. He was connected with Clement out in California, and suffere stroke of some kind while at  Kirk thanked her broke the connection. r himself, is too much a to be a coincidence nent nuclear denly within seven other at opposite e try -- and bot same P iT : him leaftrial tranPaul Corto have heard into . The words he stand out in letthree in the past A gain he caught up the telephone receiver, aware that his heart was pounding with excitement, and dialed a number... se Bulletin? liello; let me talk to Jerry Furness... Jerry, this is Martin Kirk at Homicide, Look, do something for me. I want to find out how many top nuclear fission boys have died in the past four or five months. , . , No, no ; nothing like that. Some of the boys down here were having " an argument about... Sure; I'll hold on." He propped the receiver between his ear and shoulder and ;roped for a cigar. In the office beyond' the partition of his cubbyhole a woman was sobbing. Chenowich went past his open door whistling The receiver against his ear beYeah, Jerry... ? Let's have their a pencil and "Uh attacks and one fou mean all I guess. ... lone." receiver with last world-renow of nuclear physics dead from heart fai span of in no mood for coincidences, deaths of these four scientis the result of some sinister who was responsible? Some i power, concerned about try's growing mastery of nuclear fission? Was it his duty to take over from here? Fie shook his head. Too early for anything like that. He needed more evidence-evidence not to be explained away as coincidence. Once more Lieutenant Martin Kirk went back to  analyzing the broken phrases Cordell had picked up while eavesdropping that October afternoon. Twelve times zero made no sense at all .  . unless it could be the combination of a safe... ? Hardly possible ; no combination he'd ever heard of would read that way. The next one, therK... chained to two hundred thousand years . , , Another mean anything or nothin A'... sounded like the Professor said something like his colleges no idea and he'd see ivarned right away . Kirk bit thou corner of his own any colleges an warnin word was college , where he ha le ference to the man in the street, but to the Professor... Wait a minute! Not colleges! Colleagues! It was his colleagues Gilmore had promised to warn. And the word meant men and women in the same line of work as the Professor -- nuclear physics. Things, Kirk told himself with elation, were looking up! The business about "three in the past five months" was next, but he felt sure of what that had meant. But the last of the quotations wnt nowhere at all. "Something about taking in washing -- " Under less tragic circumstances, a nonsense line. But Cordell hadn't actually heard the words clearly enough to quote them with authority. That could mean he had heard words that problem," Kirk explained carelessly. "Let's say you hear a guy talking in the next room. You can't really make out the words he's saying, but right in the middle of his mumbling you hear what sounds like 'taking in washing.' Now you know that can't be right, so you try to think out what he actually did say... It was obvious Chenowich had fallen off on the first curve, so completely off that Kirk didn't bother finishing what was much too involved to begin with. The patrolman was staring at him in monstrous perplexity. "Jeez. Lieutenant. I don't get it. 'Less the guy's goin' to open up one of these here laundries. That way he'd be takin' in washinh But I don't know what else -- " sounded like "taking in washing." Taking, baking, making, slaking, raking -- the list seemed endless. "Washing" could have been the first two syllables of Washington -- and Washington would be the place where the Atomic Energy Commission hung out. Still too hazy. He leaned back and put his feet up and attacked the three mysterious words from every conceivable angle. No dice. S ight of the ambling figure of Patrolman Chenowich passing the office door caught his eye, reminding him that two heads were often better than one. "Hey, Frank." Chenowich came in. "Yeah, Kirk's feet hit the floor with a solid thump and he grabbed Chenowich's wrist with fingers that bit in like steel. "Say that again!" he shouted. "Say it just that way!" The patrolman recoiled in alarm. "What's got into you, Lieutenant? Say what?" "Taking in washing!" "Takin' in washin'? What for?" Kirk's grin threatened to split his face. "The same words," he said, "but you say them different. Only . your way's the right way! Thanks, pal. Now get out of here!" Chenowich went. His mouth was still open and his expression still troubled, but he went. The last of the killer's cryptic remarks was now clear. For Kirk reLieutenant. Somethin' doin'?" "Fin trying to figure out a little alized that "takin' " rhymed with words you'd never associate with "taking." "Bacon", for instance -- or "Dakin" S Alma Dakin, former secretary to two widely separated, and now dead, nuclear scientists. Her name had been mentioned by the slayer of Professor Gilmore only seconds before she had clubbed the savant to death. But now that "taking" had come out "Dakin" -- what did the rest of the phrase mean? Dakin in washing made no sense. What sounded like washing? Washing; washing... watching? It was close; in fact nothing he could think of came closer. right Dakin in watching ; no. Dakin is watching -- that made sense. But Alma Dakin hadn't been watching anything at the time of dell, was at her desk in the outer office. That would leave Dakin was watching as the right combination. Watching for the right opportunity for murder I  What did it mean? Well, assuming from her past record that Alma Dakin was mixed up in the deaths of two prominent men of science, it argued that she and Naia North were accomplices in a scheme to rid America of her nuclear fission experts. The nice smooth story of quited love was probably as much a lie as the personal information Naia North had given Arthur Kahler Troy. The North girl had confessed to murdering Gilmore and Juanita Cordell. As a confessed killer she must be taken into custody and booked on suspicion of homicide. Taking her was Martin Kirk's job -- and it seemed he had a contact that would lead him to her. Namely Alma Dakin. Lieutenant Kirk grabbed his hat and went out the door. Chapter V T he address for Alma Dakin turned out to be a small threestory walk-up apartment building on a quiet residential street near the outskirts of town. At two in the afternoon hardly anyone was visible on the sidewalks and only an occasional automobile passed. Kirk parked his car half a block further on down and got out into the chill November air. He entered the building foyer and looked at the name plates above the twin rows of buttons. The one for Alma Dakin told him the number of her apartment was #C. He pushed the button several times but without response. The foyer was very quiet at this time of day, and he could hear the faint rasp of her bell through the speaking tube. Kirk was on the point of shifting his thumb to the button marked superintendent when a sudden  thought stayed his hand. It was not the kind of thought a conscientious, rule-abiding police officer would harbor for a moment. The lieutenant, however, was fully aware he had no business working on a closed case to begin with -- and when you're breaking one set of rules, you might as well break Cv u? T  # C# other bells inner door it open, he voice floated Who is it?" ma'am. was , green or otherwise, alor the street curbing, but Kirk figured wouldn't know that Why, n , no, I can't inline -- tt Okay. Sorry we bothered you, Kirk' let the door swing into place hard enough to be heard upstairs. But this 'time he was on the right side of it. There was a moment of silence, then he caught the sound of retreating feet and a door closed. Without waiting further, the Lieutenant mounted the stairs to the third floor, his feet soundless on the carpeted treads. The entrance to #G was secured by a tumbler-type lock. From an inner pocket Kirk took out a small flat leather case and a thin-edged tool from that. Working with the of the expert, he the door moulding near inserted the tool blade the bolt. This he  turned the door hanlater, was standing room tastemodem woods, was to enter the tlie door . In case at an mopporbe half way i while she was still en eased with lock. moulding back would be nothin ithin ten minutes Kn: every living room in search of somethin anything, that would point to Dakin as being more than a nine to-five secretary. And secretary found nothing, no one, not even the girl who lived here, could tell that an intruder had been at work. The bedroom seemed even less promising at first. Dresser drawers gave up only the pleasantly personal articles of the average young woman. Miss Dakin, it turned out, was almost indecently fond of frothy undergarments and black transparent nightgowns -- interesting but not at all important to the over-all problem. Kirk, his search completed, sat down on the edge of the bed's footboard and totaled up what he had learned. It didn't take long, for he knew absolutely no more about Alma Dakin than he fore entering her apartment personal papers, no letters yearning boy friend in t home town, no savings ing-account scrawled line of mas greetings the apartment's To Kirk's lack of such highly significant her bavin his already strong suspicion of her was solidified into certainty of her guilt. But certainty was a long way from rock-ribbed evidence -- and that was something he must have to proceed further. He was ready to leave when it dawned on him that he had not yet looked under the bed. Kneeling, he pushed up the hanging edge of the green batik spread and peered into the narrow space. Nothing, not even a decent accumulation of dust. The light from the window was too faint, however, to reach a section of the floor near the footboard. Kirk climbed to his feet and attempted to shove that end to one side.  The bed failed to move. He blinked in mild surprise and tried again. It was only by exerting, almost his entire strength that he was able to shift the thing at all, and then no more than a few inches. He felt his pulse stir with the thrill of incipient discovery. Once he made sure nothing was anchoring the bed to the floor, he began to tap lightly against the wood in an effort to detect a possible false panel. Within two minutes he located an almost microscopic crack in the headboard cleverly concealed by a decorative design running along the base. He ran his fingers lightly i along the carvings until they encountered a small projection which gave slightly under pressure. Kirk pressed down harder on the knob. A tiny click sounded against the silence and a section of wopd some three feet square swung out. Lifting it aside, the detective found himself staring at an instrument board of some kind with a series of buttons and dials countersunk into it. The board itself formed a part of what was obviously a machine of some sort which evidently contained its own power, for there seemed to be no lead-in cord for plugging into a wall socket. It could, Kirk thought, be a short wave radio transmitter. If it was, it looked like none he had ever , come across before. On the other hand it could be some sort of infernal machine, ready to blow half the city to bits at the turn of a dial. E ven as his mind was weighing the advisability of tampering with the thing, his fingers were reaching for the various controls. Gingerly he moved one or two of the dials but nothing happened. A little more boldly now, he began to depress the buttons. As the third sank in, a low humming sound began to fill the room. Before Kirk could find a cut-off switch of some kind, the faint light of day streaming through the room's one window winked out, plunging him into a blackness so infinitely deep that it was like being buried alive. Nothing can plunge a man into the sheerest panic like the absence of light. Even a man like Martin Kirk, who had walked almost daily with danger for the past fifteen ' years. And since the form panic takes varies with the individual, the Lieutenant's reaction was an utter inability to move so much as a finger. Abruptly the low humming note a human vvt ( dials an h the words h ad  ever in his brain, Kirk's ;nded. Both his hands swoop of their own voliin visible control panel fingers danced across the buttons. x," said the voice again, to swell and recede, like a direct radio newscast from half around the world. "Contact estab -- " The word ended as though it had run into a wall. The humming note came back, then ceased -- and without warning daylight from the window washed over the bewildered and thoroughly frightened police officer. Not until five minutes had passed was Martin Kirk sufficiently in control of his nervous system to even attempt replacing the loose panel in the headboard. When at last he managed to do so, he returned the bed to its original position, closed and bolted the kitchen one last look around to make sure nothing was out of place, out of the apartment, time he was back behind I of his car and had cigar, Kirk's brain function with some' ability. He sat s collar, trying to significance of lours events. onger any doubt in this mess as she was to the murders vinced heart do with it) would have eign agent bent America's defense: thing. That machine, mind that could gether a mechanism not of this planet. Paul Cordell's story floated in a ball of blue fire soun like the ravings of a brain. And the seeming miracle Naia North's escape from a cell block now passed from fantasy to the factual. What to do about it? Martin Kirk, at this moment undoubtedly the most bewildered man alive, put his head in his hands and tried to reach a decision. Take his story to the Police Commissioner? It would r mean a padded cell -- and without even bothering to see if Alma Dakin possessed a machine more complicated than an electric iron. Some government agency? By the time the red tape was unsnarled the former secretary could have reached Pakistan on foot. Slowly from the depths terror of the Unknown, Kirk's training in police proce began to make itself started to form -- hazy at in a sharp and orderly # to the of his bad cisive orders duced the ; of almost the law. It sister livside of town who put her up for traveling bag in one fist, hour was gone in response to a skidded a a stop at the curb a block e building. He delivered a dictograph to his superior, listened a grim warning to keep his mouth shut about this at Headquarters, asked a couple of questions that drew no answers, and departed as swiftly as he had come. The next step was the dangerous one. The superintendent admitted Kirk to the Dakin apartment and went down to the. foyer to ring the bell in case the girl arrived at the wrong time. He soothed the Lieutenant's anxiety somewhat by explaining that she seldom returned the place before seven o'clock, over three hours from now, but Kirk was taking no chances. y five o'clock he had Alma s bedroom  bugged and the working order and He was painsremoving all traces of sawdust and bits of the dresser cover the diefoyer and #D to take up He was in the s room, workin ,, earphones in he heard, the sound o; door closing in the next a The time was #:#. Chapter t was like being in her room with his eyes shut. The soft scraping of drawers opening and closing, the creak of a chair being sat in, the cushioned thump of shoes dropped to the carpeted floor, even the rustle of a nylon slip as she drew it over her head. It seemed much too early for her to turn in for the night. Was he going to be forced to sit there and listen to twelve or fourteen hours of feminine snoring? It would be damned unlikely in view of what was a cinch to be running through her mind, f Minutes later he heard her leave the bedroom, followed the muted roar of a shower. After that had laste mal length of time ceased and naked on the bedroom, more opening ; ers, the whispe donned, and sound like lass which he part of the If there was anything of a panicky nature in her movements it would take better ears than his to detect it. But for Alma Dakin to get away with her kind of job required the nerves of lion trainer no matter what pressures she was subjected to. Kirk stretched his legs, dug a cigar from the breast pocket of his coat and got it burning, then went back to the crossword puzzle with half his attention, keeping alert for any significant sound from the other apartment. His years as a minion of the law had adequately conditioned him to the utter boredom that went with the ordinary stake-out. Several times the subject left the bedroom, but he was able to pick up sounds familiar enough to trace as emanating from the living room or kitchen. But nothing she did was worthy of notice in the home-town paper or even on the margin of a police blotter. A t #:# Alma Dakin again entered the bedroom. A hunch, or a sixth sense, or whatever years of experience in a single field gives a man, told Kirk that this time something would pop. He put aside the newspaper, placed a sheet of blank paper on the cover of a historical romance lifted from the spinster's nightstand, and got out a pencil, A motor whined unexpectedly from the opposite side of the apartment wall and he could hear a heavy object roll with well-oiled smoothness a short distance across the carpet. He decided it was the bed being moved out from the wall by mechanical means rather than muscle, and it was clear to him now how she was able to get at that hidden radio, or whatever it was. For the second time that day Kirk heard that eerie humming -- a sound, he realized, that ordinarily would have been completely inaudible beyond the girl's bedroom walls. Suddenly the hum was chopped off and a familiar voice spoke familiar words. I "Mythox. Contact established. Proceed." "A message for Orin. Alma Dakin" A series of almost undetectable clicking sounds; then: "Alma?" Despite the fact that the voice was coming through an amplifier, there was no distortion. "Anything wrong?" It was a man's voice, clear, vibrant, young, and with no trace of an alien accent. Kirk's theory' of an interplanetary' menace lost some of its strength. "I -- I'm not sure, Orin," the girl said hesitantly. "There was a policeman at my apartment today -- the same one Naia went to; The building superintendent told me," "That's odd. There's no way you can be tied in with her. Or is there ?" "Not that I know of, Orin. Unless they've decided to check back on me just for the sake of some-, thing to do. If that's what's happened and they've learned I was working for Dr. Karney at the time of his death, they may get an idea the three deaths are related. And once a police officer gets suspicious, he can hound you unmercifully. That's what worries me, Orin. You know Fm not really an accomplished liar!" . I "Shall we bring you here? At least long enough to build you a new identity?" A pause. Then the girl's voice again: "Something else puzzles me, too. There's no mention of Naia's confession in the newspapers." "What? You mean they haven't released Cordell? What will Tamu say?" "If they have, nobody knows about it. I told you Naia should have remained in their hands until the young man was set free. You don't know my people as I do. Orin -- none of you do." "But the evidence? Nobody, not even the most stupid of Earthmen, could have ignored that evidence! Tamu won't like this." "I can't help it, Orin. I keep telling you, Orin: you must use a new set of standards for this world. If its people thought as yours do, none of these unpleasant things would have to happen."  A nother pause before the man's voice came over Kirk's earphones. "We didn't dare leave Naia in their hands. That's why we brought her back here. Look at the chance we took by permitting them to hold her even briefly. If only she hadn't blundered in the first place... " His voice trailed off, then came back suddenly brisk. "Well, too late for regrets. We won't risk letting them question you. Field Seven in, say, three hours. Time enough?" "More than enough!" Her relief was unmistakable. "It'll be wonderful visiting Mythox again, Orin. I hope Methu will allow me to stay for a long time." t "I hope so too, darling. But our work comes first; none of us dares let down for even a moment... See you soon. And don't neglect to eliminate the contrabeam." "It will be gone seconds after we break contact. Field Seven at -- let's see -- #:#." "I'll be there. Farewell, Alma." The dim humming came back again, followed briefly by no sound at allf Then there was the noise of drawers being opened and closed with a kind of brisk and cheerful haste. Alma Dakin was preparing to take it on the lam! , Martin Kirk knew he had only a limited time to plan his own course of action. One way was to walk into the adjoining apartment, place Alma Dakin under arrest and force the whole story from her. A moment's reflection, however, caused him to abandon the idea. Any such move would end his chances of getting his hands on Naia North. More than anything else he wanted her, and he closed his mind to the broader aspects of what had taken -- and was still taking -- place. No, his job was to follow Alma Dakin to her rendezvous with this man Orin and in some way force the two of them into turning Naia North over to him. This time she'd stick around long enough to stand trial -- even if he had to handcuff her to the bars of her cell ! From beyond the wall he .caught the sounds of suitcases being snapped shut, followed by the fading echo of footsteps. He jerked the earphones from his head and went quickly to the hall door in time to catch a glimpse of Alma Dakin on her way to the building stairs, a bulging suitcase in each hand. Kirk raced for the kitchen of #D, flung open the door and went down the rear steps with astonishing agility. He was opening the door of his car by the time the girl came out of the front entrance. He watched her place the bags in the trunk of a small sand-colored coupe, then slip in behind its wheel and start the motor. The coupe passed his parked car, turned the corner and disappeared. Before it had reached the next intersection, Kirk was rolling smoothly half a block to her rear. Two hours later both cars were moving along a winding country road miles from civilization. Kirk was driving without lights, bad enough under favorable circumstances but sheer folly considering the sky was completely overcast, so that he was denied even the faint radiance of the stars. Fortunately there was no other traffic in this desolate section at eleven o'clock at night, so that his only danger was in failing to remain on the twisting road. in ally, , near the crest of a particularly steep hill, two flaring red lights warned him his quarry was applying the brakes of her car. He cut ins engine long enough to hear the coupe's motor die, then he swung his wheel to the right and coasted to a halt on the soft shoulder of the road. Under cover of bushes and trees, naked of foliage at this time of the year, Kirk worked his way silently ahead until' he could make out the dim figure of the girl as she dragged the pair of bags from the boot. Without a backward glance, she turned away from the road and an instant later was lost to sight among the trees. There was nothing of the frontiersman in Lieutenant Martin Kirk, but fortunately the same was true of Alma Dakin. Where anyone accustomed to moving across natural terrain could have lost the officer with ease, in her case he need only pause briefly from time to time and use his ears. At last the seemingly interminable forest ended and the girl sank wearily down on an upended suitcase. Kirk, perspiring freely under the folds of his topcoat, halted in the shelter of a' tree bole, and waited. Beyond where the girl sat was a large natural clearing covered with a fringe of winter grass. The silence was close to being absolute; only the faint keening of a chill wind and the restless creak of barren branches kept it from becoming unbearable. Gradually his eyes became more and more accustomed to the absence of light worthy of the name, and he began to identify objects as something more than formless na er :te. the akin appeared to  him than he had d her slim back I when she lighted vind bringing the co to his nostrils, he lv have strangled her torture. by. An hour by n minutes by the of his wrist watch. ! # gan to twitch imho! ding the same he managed to losive sneezes; he s able to do so #:# was like being broken  rack. He caught himself str his ears for the sound of a # of a faint humming -- of an to indicate Orin was ar; Nothing -- and at #:# still ingMartin Kirk had had ; could take. He was through in # out on a windv hill like tire night air abc and he was starin circular structure as Before the Lieutenant could get his jaw off his necktie, Alma Dakin had uttered a cry of relief and was racing toward the nearest edge of the gleaming vessel. A panel in its side slid noiselessly back and the tall figure of a man was outlined in the opening. "Alma!" he shouted and sprang to the ground to meet her. They came together almost violently midway between the clearing's edge and the ship. She clung to him as he bent his head to meet her lips. Kirk glanced past them at the open portal. Dim light from within cast a soft glow against the night. Nothing moved in the narrow segment of the interior visible from where he was standing. And Kirk had a moment of what was as close to fear as he was able to know. A little time of bewilderment when his guard slipped just a trifle. What in the hell was all this? Into his solid world had come strange and unreasonable things. Crazy ships, and people who didn't play according to the rules he had learned over thankless drudging years as an honest cop. A few tiny beads of sweat formed on his upper lip. Then Ms stubborn, inherent fatalism came to his aid. He grinned without humor. The hell with it. Whatever came up -- a screwball flying saucer or a berserk psycho waving a gun. You played it the same; according to your own rules. This thing, whatever it was, bridged the gap to a killer. And when you found such a bridge, you crossed it. M .rtin kirk, his gun clutched tightly, movedlike a casual shadow, eased his way along the hull of ship and slipped inside. He had never seen anything like this. The lighting for one thing. It came from nowhere and somehow the stuff had a mood. It seemed alive -- an intelligent force watching him, mocking him, sneering at him. And so potent was the mood of the whole setup, so sharp his need of release that he muttered, "The hell with you," and softly followed a circular corridor which curved off the hull. They were coming toward the ship, Orin and Alma -- coming while he still hunted a hole. He kept on going. If he met anybody they were going tago down. But he didn't. He found a steel stairway and a pocket at its base to hold his body. It wasn't a dark pocket. Light was everywhere. But the stairway hid him and the pair passed by and went on down the corridor. He realized his right hand was aching and relaxed his grip on the gun butt he clutched. He straightened up and the tense little mirthless grin played on his lips. Okay. Now where was she and howdid it work? Could he find her and haul her off silly tilt-awhirl? He thought not. Either his eyes were bad or this thing had appeared from nowhere. Something inside snapped: Quit thinking that way! Whatever it looked like -- think right. Follow the rules. Look for the dame. His grin deepened. Sure. He started walking. Around the eerie corridor in the direction opposite that taken by Orin and Alma Dakin. He walked a long time and there were no doors or anything else so the only thing to do was keep walking. He thought: When I come to that stairway I'll be back where I started but where's that? What good is a hall you keep going around and around in? The ship lurched and threw him to the floor. It was going somewhere. But it didn't go anywhere. Of that he was sure. Maybe he'd been fooled but it seemed the ship settled back after that single lurch and lay there like a choice segment out of someone's pet nightmare. Kirk got to his feet and rubbed the place his leg had violently met the floor. He walked on and there was the steel stairway again and it was all very damned silly because he knew he'd circled the times. But lucky because the footsteps sounded again and as he dived toward the pocket, the wall of the ship opened to form a doorway. They forgot something, he thought. What kind of supermen are these? They can build a ship that has a stairway every third trip around and still they go away and forget things,  The grin 'was tighter than ever. Whistle in the dark, boy, but admit it -- you're scared. Sure, but what's that got to do with it? . Orin and Alma left the ship. Martin Kirk pushed his head around the staircase. He crouched ship at least three  for sometime, staring through the open segment of the hull at the outside world. And his poor stupid orthodox mind asked a pitifully logical question: How could it get light, with the sun at high noon, in fifteen minutes? After a long, motionless time, the silence became such a roaring thing in Kirk's ears he could stand it no longer. He got up and walked to the doorway. Something had gone somewhere; either the ship or the world he'd known, because out there was a different world and he knew damn well he'd never seen it before. M artin kirk stepped out into a circle of lush vegetation. And in doing so, he learned something. He learned that the human mind is a far more adaptable mechanism than most people imagine; that they can pelt you with goof balls and you get sweat on your iip and have to talk to yourself to keep from sliding off your rocker, but after a while when your mind seems halfway over the edge, it straightens up suddenly and starts going along. A defense mechanism against insanity? He didn't know. He only knew that when the tiger roared, he whirled around with his gun leveled, saw the sixinch teeth, got wholesomely and sanely scared, and then everything was all right. He knew he was all right when he got the right reaction from sight of the almost naked girl holding the tiger. For a long moment it was a frozen-action tableau. The huge orange and black beast. The wide eyed young brunette nudist, and the tropical forest with the great big fart sun overhead. The girl's voice nailed it all down. "Don't be afraid. Rondo won't hurt you." Kirk's resentment flared warmly and, had resentment been a tangible thing, he would have kissed it. "You're tootin' right he won't, sister. This isn't a toy Fm holding." "Rondo is very gentle." Kirk eyed the girl. "Why don't you put some clothes on?" Her teeth were as bright and even as little white knives but her smile took the edge off them. "Only people in the city wear clothes. I wear them when I'm in the city. When I come out here I -- " " -- you don't wear any clothes. Tell me -- where am I?" "Don't you know?" "Let's not play games. If I knew f wouldn't ask you." "Did you come on the ship?" "You saw me get out of it didn't you? Now answer my question." And he realized how certain he was of what her answer would be. "On Mythox." "Well fancy that. 'Now tell me something else. Do you know what  language you're speaking?" "Of course. English." "And why should you speak English on Mythox? Haven't you got a language of your own?" "Certainly. Rut you're obviously from Earth. I thought you were a Watcher. I tried English. If you hadn't responded I'd have spoken to you in the other Earth languages." "How many do you know?" I "Eleven hundred and seventeen. With various dialects, four thousand and -- "  "There aren't that many." She looked puzzled. Then her face cleared. "Oh you mean Earth languages. I was referring to those of the Five Galaxies." I'm not going to be surprised at anything, he told himself doggedly. Not at anything. "Do you know anyone named Naia North?" T here was a childlike seriousness in her manner. It tended to deny the maturity of her body. Or was it the other way around? Martin Kirk wasn't sure, and grimly assured himself that he didn't give a damn. The girl said, "I don't know anyone by that name. But I could find her for you." "How would you go about it?" "I'd go to the city and check the video-directory, naturally." "Naturally. And you'd put your clothes on before you went?" "Of course I would. We go without clothing only out here in the playground." Kirk realized he'd been holding the gun rigidly in front of him. The tiger had dropped to the ground and lay outstretched like a lazy, good-natured dog. Kirk lowered the gun, setting his eyes again on the girl. "A minute ago you said you thought I was a Watcher. What did you mean?" He would have framed his questions with more guile, but something told him it wasn't necessary. This child of nature was utterly without guile. She said, "An Earth Watcher. What did you think I meant?" "I didn't know or I wouldn't have asked." It clarified. Dakin is watching. Sure. What the hell else would a Watcher do but watch? But why, and for what? Kirk was mystified. But it didn't matter, he asserted inwardly, and turned his mind back to the straight line. The cop's line. "Will you put on your clothes and go into the city and locate Naia North for me?" "If it will help you" "It will. Where can I wait for you?" "If you want to see Naia North why don't you come with me?" Kirk shrugged. Why not? So long as the score was completely unknown to him, why not follow the path of least resistance? "Get your clothes on," he said. The girl turned and started leading the tiger back toward a grove of trees. After a few steps she turned back, a look of sober thought on her face. "Are all Earthlings so assertive?" she asked. Kirk grinned. As long as it works, this one is, baby. But what if it stops working? His reply was not audible and the girl turned finally to disappear into the bushes. Kirk then experienced a strange feeling of unreality which persisted until the girl returned. TVT Y name is Raima," the wore tight-fitting trousers, a loose blouse and had a silver colored air car with room in back for the tiger. Kirk knew it was an air car whc;i the craft lifted from the ground from no apparent means of acceleration and skimmed along just above the trees. He sat beside Raima and asked, "About that ship I came here in? How fast does it travel and how far is it from Mythox to Earth?" "The distance is around two hundred thousand light years but the ship doesn't really travel at all." "Maybe you could go into a little more detail," Kirk said wearily. "It's very simple. Distance, as you Earthlings regard it, is not distance at all. Space bends to a greater or lesser degree depending upon its immediate function in whatever time-space equation you are using." "Thank you very much," Kirk replied and silently added: Keep to the line. Hold to your own values. On Earth, wherever it is, a J  r man is waiting to go to the chair for a murder he didn't commit. Use whatever equation you want to -- that still adds up the same. These people may be a lot smarter than you are, but they can't twist that one and make you believe it comes out anv different. A strange city of graceful flying spirals was coming over the horizon. It moved closer and the air car arced in to a halt on a huge cement landing area punctuated with small circles of a different material. Raima jumped from the cockpit .s ear the soft paws landing ? ent over and the circles. in the city and image wi. As Kirk watche  Don' t you want to street level?' stupid of me beside the slapped the The circle dropped silently bein a bright metal tube a door soon appeared to out into a broad street  with casually moving pedes-. Kirk noted that none of them seemed in any hurry; that here and there was an individual dressed like himself. Watchers on furlough or vacation, he thought a trifle bitterly. This picture was far from complete but enough of it added up to furnish a name for them. uizling was a good one. Perhaps" traitor was better. All in all, he found one satisfaction. He could travel about as he huge of short walk brought them to a four or five story wall, the like had never seen. It symmetrically covered with #, opaque, glass windows, beeach of which was a dial not ones on Earth teleof some bright the wall. On these rous "people were e  video-directory, ave no further e Rondo lazily cub sittin for its mas rinmn paw, the cleared and the tal of Naia North lure. "You may speak in here said, solemnly tndicatin: screened opening beside the mirror. "My! She's pretty, isn't she?" Naia North was entirely composed. She wore a pale blue gown and from the background in the mirror, Kirk gathered that she was at home. "Aren't you surprised?" Kirk asked. Now a slight frown creased the lovely Naia's brow. "A little perhaps. How did you get to Mythox? And why did you come?" "A slight matter of murder. A murder you confessed to, or has it slipped your mind?" "Aren't you being rather absurd? That's all done with." "Not so far as Paul Cordell is concerned. He's going to the only he isn't. We're and straighten a few things out. n 'surprise was rene now. And possibly a certain 'My opinion of you I hadn't rated you as fool. How did you? 'The same way y  frown mean you were "Not away on that n't  The beautiful brow immediately cleared, "Oh, I see," Naia observed with amusement, "And you know exactly how you'll get me back to Earth I suppose? Thousands of light years. It's a long walk." 'Til take one thing at a time and worry about them in order of appearance. The main thing for you to remember, is this: You may be as smart as all get out but you broke an American law on American soil by your own confession and by God you're going back and answer for it!" "Idiot! I can have you -- " K irk's mood changed to the quizzical. "It's entirely beside the point, but still I don't get you, baby. Why the switcheroo? You walked in and confessed. Then you took a powder. Now' you sneer in my teeth. What do you use for a rudder, sweetheart." "I followed orders," Naia flared with a mixture of anger and sullenness. "I am now free of the assignment." Kirk pursed his lips thoughtfully. "You wouldn't be sort of a hatchetwornan for this high-blown outfit would you? I can think offhand of a few other names. Karney, Blatz, Kennedy. What gives with knocking off nuclear physicists, baby?" Naia did not answer. When she started to turn away from the mirror , Kirk glanced at the silent Raima standing with her hand on the tiger's head. "Is there any way I can call on the lady in the mirror personally?" "Not if she doesn't want to receive you," Raimu said. She was studying Kirk with wistful dark eyes. ' Naia turned back quickly. "Fll be glad to receive you. It's time I taught you a lesson." "Fine. What's your address?" But Naia was gone. The little mirror turned opaque. Kirk shot a questioning glance at Raimu. "Does yes mean no on this cockeyed planet?" "Her car will come." Raimu murmured. But the petite dark beauty seemed interested in other things. "You didn't tell me your name." "Sorry. Rude of me. It's Martin Kirk. You've been pretty nice to me. I wish there was some way I could show my appreciation," "You're going to see Naia North?" "Yes. She's a murderess. I'm taking her back to my planet." "I'm afraid that wouldn't be possible." "You too, honey?" Kirk reached out and flicked one of the raven curls. "If things were different you and I might be able to have fun." "I spend a lot of time -- where you found me. Maybe -- " "I doubt if I can make it. But keep your clothes on after this -- as a personal favor to me." She was the very soul of solemnity. "I don't understand you. I really don't understand you at all." At that moment, an air car --  much smaller than Raimu's, dropped gently into the street beside Kirk. "Good lord! Did this thing smell me out?" "It came to the mirror on Naiads private wave-length. Get in. It will way. The mocking smile was still on take you to her." her face. "Did you trip?" Kirk crawled into the car. The Kirk got groggily to his feet. "No, last thing he saw before it lifted into angel. That's the way I always cross the air, were Raimu's dazzling a room." As he came upright his black eyes. The last words he heard hand reached toward the bulge were, "Goodbye. Martin Kirk. I made by his shoulder holster. Rut will visualize you." it didn't get that far. The car swung up above the He had not seen from whence graceful, spidery buttresses and the first blow came but that was moved across the city. Kirk filled not true with the second. From a in the time by trying to figure out tiny opening in the door jamb, a what made the thing go. He hadn't pinpoint of light appeared. It hung gotten to first base when the car there for a moment. Then it brightlost altitude and came' to rest on a ened, expanded, and shot forth as balcony hung with seeming perila slim beam. It contained a silvery ousness on a sheer white wall. Kirk radiance and the kick of a Missouri stepped out. A large glass panel had mule. It slammed against Kirk's been pushed back and Naia stood jaw, but not quite so hard this time; waiting in the opening. only hard enough to send him down "Nice of you to receive me," Kirk again amidst a cloud of shooting said. "Have you got your bags stars. packed for a trip stateside?" He shook his head and got to his "Please come this way." hands and knees. "Wha's 'at? A Naia turned and moved through trained flashlight?" He began comthe room just off the balcony. On ing up.As soon as he didn't need the far side another door gave exit, his right hand for rising he reached She passed through it and turned for his gun. The light beam seemed as though waiting for Kirk. He took to resent this. It hit him in the one step, two, three, four. solar plexus this time; a sickening Then something came from blow that fed nausea down through somewhere and almost tore his jaw his legs. He tightened his stomach off. He wgnt out in an explosion of against the agony and began getblack light. ting up again. "You see how useless it is?" Naia asked. "Beside us, you Earthlings . are children. Will you stop being Kirk squinted craftily at the pinpoint of ight with one closed eye. K irk came to with the feelClever little devil. What the hell! ing that his period of unconNude innocents. Tigers on leashes, sciousness had been momentary. Light beams that knocked your Naia was standing as she had stood teeth out. Paul Cordell with a before, just beyond the inner doorshaved spot on his head... "You got your bag packed for a little trip, baby?" For a brief moment, genuine fear flamed in Naia's eyes. And in Kirk's mind: Dumb babe. What's she got to be scared of? They hit you with nothing and make it stick. Kirk croaked, "Grab your bag, baby. We'll go find that flying biscuit. We got a date with Arthur Kahler Troy." He was really cagey this time. When the light beam shot out, he hurled himself to the side. But he could have saved the effort. A beam came from the other door jamb and he stepped right into it. That one really tore his head off. S omebody was talking. It was a man and he had a deep resonant voice: a voice full of authority -- and censure. "Im surprised at you Naia. I never suspected you of having a sadistic streak." Naia's sullen reply. "Do you think anyone can do the work I do and remain unmarked?" "I suppose not. But as I remember it, you asked to serve." "As a benefit to humanity." "We won't go into it." But Naia pressed the point. "I have always followed orders. I placed myself in possible jeopardy on Earth by clearing Paul Cordell." "But Paul Cordell was not cleared." "Not through any fault of mine." "But why this? What end does torturing this poor unfortunate serve?". Martin Kirk cautiously opened one eye. It brought to his brain the image of a large blue globe, A man of fine and commanding appearance stood within the globe, suspended about a foot from the floor. The globe and the man gave every indication of having just come through the opaque glass wall of the room, and as Kirk watched, the man was lowered slowly to the floor and the globe became a blue mist that spiralled lazily and was gone. Kirk opened both eyes now, stirred, and climbed dizzily to his feet. "You bump into the damndest tilings around here," he said. "But let's get down to the important business. My name is Martin Kirk. I'm an American police officer. One of your subjects committed a murder on American soil. I hope you aren't going to be difficult about extradition." The other could not hide his surprise. Nor did he try to. "Amazing," he murmured. Then, "I am Tamil, the overlord of the galaxy. I wonder if Naia's cruelty hasn't affected your mind?" "If you mean I'm nuts, I think maybe you're right. But it wasn't little Playful here who did it. I've gone through a lot and I don't speak with any sense of bragging. I've seen more furiny things happen than any one man should see in so short a time. So maybe I am off my rocker. So I'd like your permission to take my prisoner back to Earth so I can give all my time to regaining my sanity." Tarau regarded Kirk with thoughtful eyes. "I think we should have a talk."  "I would like a talk. I would like nothing better than to chew the fat with you for hours on end if my jaw didn't hurt so damned much. So PH just take my prisoner and go. Do I have to sign a paper or something?" The overlord's surprise was fast becoming a kind of fascinated awe. "Kirk, you said?" He pointed to the door leading to the inner room. "Please go in, sir. There's no use of our standing out here while we discuss your problem." The Lieutenant eyed the door frame warily. "I tried getting through there before but the light got in my eyes!" "You can trust me." The police officer stepped cautiously through the opening and on into a luxuriously furnished room. Tamu, dressed much the same as one of Earth's better bankers, followed him in and suggested he sit down. "Why?" Kirk demanded bluntly. "Let's stop kitten-and-micing around, Mr. Tarnu. I'm not comfortable here and I want to leave. With her." He tilted his head toward the watching, sullen-faced Naia North. "And now." Tamu said, "Believe me, it will be as easy for you to return to Earth an hour from now. You seem weary to the point of exhaustion. I ask you again: sit down and get back some of your strength. Naia will find you something to eat." Kirk's stubborn determination to force an immediate showdown wavered. It had been born largely of fear to begin with, and  the thought of relief for his burning throat was impossible to resist. "I could use a drink," he admitted. Tamu gestured and Naia North turned to leave the room. But Kirk leaped forward to block her off. "Nothing doing! I don't take my eyes off you, baby. I'll just pass up that drink." The girl glanced at the overlord and shrugged helplessly. Tamu said, "Have a girl bring in something. While we're waiting I suggest all three of us get comfortable." While Naia was speaking into a tiny screen set into one of the silkcovered walls, Tamu and the man from Earth sat down across from each other on a pair of fragilelegged chairs. The overlord leaned back and sighed. "You've asked my leave to return to Earth and to take Naia back with you to stand trial for murder. Have you considered that I may refuse that permission?" "I don't think I have to consider it," Kirk said promptly. "You don't?" Tamu was mystified again. "Why not?" "You tell me you're the overlord. I take that to mean you're in charge. That means you have laws to govern your people and that means you believe in laws. One of your subjects has broken the law of my country. You can't refuse to let her take the consequences any more than if the situation was reversed." Tamu was shaking his head and smiling slightly. "I'm afraid you're not taking into consideration on fact, Mr. Kirk. Naia North broke your law, as you call it, on express and definite instructions from me." Martin Kirk made a show of astonishment. "Let me get this straight. You ordered Professor Gilmore and Juanita Cordell murdered? Is that what you're telling me?" "Yes." "Why?" ' "Exactly the reason I suggested we have a talk. To make you see why they -- and others in the same classification -- could not be allowed to live."  , ' "Men like Karney? Kennedy? Blatz?" Tamu blinked. "My respect for you increases, Martin Kirk." "Don't let it throw you. I'm a police officer, and police officers are trained to do the job right." The overlord crossed his legs and settled deeper into the chair. "Mythox needs men like you, Martin Kirk. That is why I'm going to give you a chance for life. For this you must understand: if I wanted it, you would be dead within seconds." A chill slid along the stubborn back of the Lieutenant but nothing showed in his impassive expression and he did not speak. "But because we do need you, I am going to tell you things no Earthman knows. I believe that once you understand why Mythox has undertaken to meddle in the affairs of another world -- and I tell you frankly that our doing so is as abhorrent to us as anything you can imagine -- once you understand our reasons, you will cheerfully, even eagerly, join us," "And if I don't?" . "You know the answer to that, A I'm sure." A slim fairhaired girl in a pale green toga-like dress entered the room carrying a tray holding tall glasses of some sparkling blue beverage. She offered it first to Kirk, then the others. The Lieutenant removed one of the glasses, wajted until Tamu and Naia had done the same, but not until they had drunk some of the liquid did he tilt his own glass. The cold tangy liquid hit him like a bombshell -- a bombshell on the pleasant side. He could almost literally feel his strength flow back, his senses sharpen and the poisons of fatigue and mental strain disappear. "I'm listening," he said. Tamu set his glass on the edge of a nearby table and bent forward, his manner earnest. "It won't take long. Martin Kirk. Hear me. We of Mythox are far in advance of the peoples of Earth -- both spiritually and scientifically. Life on our plhnet materialized in much the same manner as on your own world, but countless ages before. Almost the same process of evolution took place ; but somewhere along the line humanity on 'Mythox managed to reach full development without the flaws of character found among so many of Earth's inhabitants. When I tell vou that we find it almost impossible to voice an untruth, that taking a human life willfully for any reason is equally difficult, that crime of any nature is almost unknown here -- then you will see the difference between the two planets ... have ob place on a method for from terrene to managed to ht years of  worlds as we of years ago we control of your .ay we might choose. That is not our way, Martin Kirk, Free will is our heritage too -- and we respect it in ourselves, and that reason must respect it in others. So long as Earth's peoples confined their more destructive tendencies to themselves we kept our hands off -- even while we failed to understand such I ' senseless conduct. "And then one day we witnessed an explosion on. Earth's surface -- an explosion different from any of the countless ones before it. That explosion was the first man-made release of atomic energy -- a process we had known how to bring about' ages, but one we would never use. For we have learned the secret imitless power without the formation of mass into energy, is the way of destruction, ours isexactly the xst time. the leaders of of fear nuclear fison to the one hr ou eh ou t the in the were still would be no  part in Earth's our way, ; be. But there must   to this rule: no be allowed to treme I mentioned a moment T amu, overlord paused to drink from and to cast a speculative the stolid face of Martin Kirk might as well have studied the contours of a brick wall. "The road to that blunder had been opened the day your learned men first split the atom. If they persisted down that path, it was bound to follow that they would attempt the thing we feared : the splitting of hydrogen atoms -- the hydrogen bomb, as you call it. "We know what that would mean: a chain reaction that would wipe out an entire galaxy in one blinding flash. Our galaxy , Martin Kirk -- yours and mine! Do have any thought at all on that means?" The question was even ecu. head, the overlord "Mythox and grains of dust on aa s stars ant! planets wide and # Me countless other number of not always, know it, but thoroughly as we do our own. Fortunately for our purpose only a relative few have progressed along a line which can lead to danger for the rest. Yours is one of those which has -- and that is why we of Mythox have taken a well-masked place in your affairs so far as they relate to nuclear physics. "Every scientist of your world, male or female, is constantly under the eye of a Watcher. These Watchers are members of your own races -- people we have enlisted in the fight to save not just their world "When a W atcher learns a physicist is close to the one key to success in his effort to make a hydrogen bomb -- an equation that begins: 'Twelve times zero point seven nine' -- we are notified and a killer from our own people is sent to execute that scientist. Yes, Martin Kirk, we have those among us -- a very few -- who are capable of killing on orders and for cause. Naia, here, is one of them. She was sent to take the lives of Gregory Gilmore and Juanita Cordell; but she bungled and instead of their deaths resembling heart failure, they were obviously murdered. "Alma Dakin tried to cover up the truth by making it appear both scientists had died at the hands of a jealous husband. She succeeded, both because of her perjured testimony and the fact that Paul Cordell insisted on telling the truth. But when we of Mythox learned what had happened, Naia was sent back to confess the crime. She entered the laboratory only a few hours before she came...to your office; while she was in the laboratory the second time, the clues you found were put there. "Our mistake was in thinking that, once proof was offered clearing Cordell, the innocent man would be freed. For once more we credited Earthlings with the same code of ethics we of Mythox adhere to. "You succeeded in following Naia here. Only a man composed of equal parts of Earth bulldog and genius could have done so. Martin Kirk, I offer you a place among us and a lifetime devoted to making sure the galaxy of which we both are a part does not perish. What say you?" Several minutes dragged by. The eyes of both Tamu and Naia North were glued, to the grim visage of Homicide Lieutenant Kirk. It was impossible for either of them to know what thoughts were churning behind that stone face. Abruptly he stood up. "I'm a cop. I leave your kind of problem to the people who are good at it. My people, Tamu. You see, I belong to my world, not to yours. "But you've got a solid argument -- one I'd be a fool not to consider. Let me sleep n it. Tomorrow morning we'll talk about it some more; then I'll give you my answer. Right now I'm too worn out to think in a straight line." "Of course." The overlord rose to his feet. "Find Martin Kirk comfortable quarters, Naia, and leave orders he is not to be disturbed until he is ready to join us." On his way down a corridor behind the same slip of a girl who had brought him his drink, Martin Kirk was thinking: They didn't even frisk me for a gun! Martin Kirk went into his apartment and lay for a while looking at the ceiling. After a time, he got up and went out again. Chapter IX T he soft silvery radiance which this planet seemed to feature, bathed the metal hallway as Kirk marched stolidly toward the slim arcing stairway that led toward Naia's floor. This was certainly a strange building, he thought. The architects of Mythox knew how to use curves. They utilized them for utility and beauty to a point where a straight line was something to be surprised at. Pretty smart people, the Mythoxians -- in more ways than one. And Kirk, for no apparent reason, thought of a phrase comnion among children during his own childhood. "Who died and left you boss?" He counted the markings over one door. He had seen those markings before. Naia North lived here. And Naia North was in. Kirk walked softly across the large foyer room and quietly pushed open a door to the left. Naia, clad as always, in beauty, lay sleeping on a bed that stood out from the wall on two narrow rods of metal and needed no other support. As Kirk opened his mouth, Naia awakened, so she was looking calmly at him as he spoke. "Up, baby. You've got a date with a hot electrode a lot of light years from here. It's a hike, so rise and shine." , Naia sat up very slowly, very gracefully. She was what men dream of finding in bed beside them. What they marry to keep in bed beside them. "You must be mad" "As a hatter, baby. Into your duds." He saw her glance at the door jamb of the bedroom entrance, saw the shadow of disappointment in her lovely eyes. "You didn't put those Joe Louis light rays in your bedroom, did you?" Naia set her feet on the floor and drew herself to her full height. She wore light blue, a gown that hung as had that of Guinevere, as that of the Maid of Shalot. But Naia was contempt. She was contempt clothed in cold blue then contempt naked as she allowed the gown to fall to the floor. A few minutes later, she was contempt clothed for the street in tight britches and a loose blouse. "You go first," Kirk said. "And do as you're told. You may be a Mythoxian, but this .# doesn't know that. It puts big holes in anybody." As Naia walked serenely toward the hall door, there was only a touch of sullenness at the comers of her mouth. She turned her head to speak over her shoulder. "Hiding ' behind a t woman, brave Earthman?" "Yes and no. I'm hiding behind a woman from those damn straightleft rays, and Pm not a brave Earthman. I spend most of my time scared to death. That's why all of us are getting back to Earth quick, so I can draw an easy breath,"  "All of us?"  "Oh yes. Didn't I tell you? Yoii're taking me to the places I can find Alma Dakin and Orin. We're going to have witnesses and testimony. And the party who gets burned isn't going to be Paul Cordell." "I won't -- " "Hold it, honey." Kirk had picked up two items upon leaving Naia's apartment. A pair of filmy silk stockings and a white scarf. He jerked Naia's hands behind her back in somewhat of a surprise move. Before she recovered, her wrists were tightly bound. She gasped, "You -- madman," just before he deftly pulled the scarf across her mouth and twisted it into an effective gag. He stepped back to admire his handywork. "Now we're all ready. Orin and Alma." Naia shook her head in a slow' negative. Kirk pushed her gently into the hall and rounded to face her. "Yes, baby," he said. "You ought to know now I won't be stopped. I need Orin to fly that space buggy. If I don't get him we can't go. Then there'd be nothing left for me to do but even the score for Paul Cordell. He'll have to go but you'll keep him company." Naia stood like ' a statue, apparently considering. Then she moved slowly down the corridor in the opposite direction from which Kirk had come. Down three curving flights and stopping finally in front of a door identical to her own. L Kirk stepped forward and leaned firmly on the knob. The door opened. He knew where the bedroom was in these apartments now. He pushed Naia ahead of him, into the bedroom and saw Alma lying with her eyes dosed. Kirk whirled, just in time to level his gun and bring Orin to a dead stop. "Over by the bed, high-born." As Orin complied, Kirk leered at Naia. "That was clever, but I had it doped. I spotted them for husband and wife or the Mythox equivalent quite some time back. A good chance shot to hell." "What do you want here?" Orin demanded. "A chauffeur. We're heading Earthward on the first ship. That's the one out in the jungle." "But you talked to Tamu. I thought -- " "I'd been suckered? No no my friend ! On the force they called me the boy with the one-track mind." "I can see what they meant," Orin sighed. "I thought you would. Tell your wife to get dressed. We're getting an airsled." "You might have the decency to -- " "I won't turn my back. You can stand between us. That's the best I can do." A lma dressed swiftly in a costume similar to Naia's. When they were ready to leave, Kirk said, "Now let's get it straight once and for all. I'll stand for no fast moves. It's Earth or some quick slugs. Do you follow me?" Theydid not speak but they evidently believed Kirk because, fifteen minutes later, the party of four stood beside the ugly ship while thick trees and grasses whispered around them. "Inside." In the corridor, Orin stopped and turned as though having thought of a convincing argument he was bent upon trying. Kirk poked him sharply in the ribs with the barrel of the .# and he moved on after the women toward the ladder and thence to the motor room. Once inside, Orin turned and spoke sharplv. "Won't you reconsider?" "Push the levers, jack. The right ones." "Tamu is a reasonable man. We could talk to him again. He would make even a more generous offer." "I'm waiting."  "Certainly you did not refute the logic of his argument? We are in the right. Our case is just. The galaxies must be protected from -- " "The right levers, Jack." " -- from those who through ignorance, stupidity,' or ferocity would destroy it." "One more minute of .this and there'll be dead people aboard this ship." "You're helpless, really. You can't fly this ship without me. Therefore my life is safe. I merely refuse to launch it." "Would you like a dead wife?" Orin whitened perceptibly. "She may be a wife to you, but to me she's just a doll who helped lie a man into the chair." "You wouldn't do it! You haven't got the nerve to shoot down a man or a woman in cold blood." Kirk looked steadily into Orin's eyes. "You don't believe that do you, hud?" Orin held the gaze for a long time. Then he dropped his eyes. "No. I don't believe it." "Then get to work." "One last offer. Won't you reconsider. Join us?" "No!" "Very well." And Orin, a fixed, taut look on his face, reached forth his hand and touched a button on the panel board. It was a very special button. A button for use only when all hope was gone. The exploding space-time ship lighted the countryside to blinding    A.P. Jan #st -- Shortly after midnight today, Paul Cordell, convicted killer in the famous "woman from Mars" case, was put to death in the electric chair at the state penitentiary. The Stowaway Alvin Heiner  s He stole a ride to the Moon in search of # glory, but found a far different destiny. -- as they had been of late -- and his voice held a continuous intensity -- as though he were imparting a secret. I've got to get on that ship! I've got to, I tell you! And I'm going to make it!" Different members of the group regarded him variously, 'some with amusement, some with contempt, others with frank curiosity. # "You're plain nuts, Joe. What do you want to go to the moon for?" "Sure, why you wanna go? What they got on the moon we aint got right here?" There was general laughter from the dozen or so who sat eating their lunch in the shade of Building B. They all thought that was a pretty good one. Good enough to repeat. "Sure, what they got on the moon we ain't got here?" But Joe Spain wasn't in the rnood for jokes. He burned with even greater conviction and stood up as though to harangue the workers. "You wanta know why I got to go to the moon? Why I've got to get on that ship? Then PH tell you. It's 'cause I'm a little guy -- that's why! Joe Spain -- working stiff -- one of the great inarticulate masses." More laughter. "Where'd you get those big words, Joey? Out of a book? Come on -- talk English!" Joe Spain pointed to the huge, tubelike Building A, off across the desert; the building you had to havetwo different passes and a written permit to enter. The mystery building where even newspaper reporters were barred. "It's only the big shots they let in there ain't it? Only them that's got a drag or went to college or something. Us little guys they tell go to blow -- ain't that right?" "Who the hell cares? Maybe it's a damn good place to stay away from. Maybe it'll explode or someVI H ship when it ey can't push got a right even if we got to on the ground  I there's the glory! to see that s there. The glory of being rst rocket ship to the name of joe Spain written down in the history books over by people and school for thousands of years! Immortality! That's the word!" "Well, just forget about it, Joe, 'cause you ain't going' joe Spain's eyes burned brighter, "joe Spain, coming down the ramp with the big shots when it's all over. News cameras snapping! People asking for interviews!" "But you ain't going 'cause-" joe shouted the man down. "And another thing. Us little people are to a representative aboard that ship. We got a right to know zoins on. How come there's it in the papers? shots knowing about ermg among s because they're trying freeze us out!" . It's for security hush-hush so it  are being smart on," the it  just me a  me one . 'Tm ;omg to Joe Spain sai up suddenly. Joe He was knew when to stop sounc The men went shifting the hi from trucks into ing the wooden crates and per wrapped parcels up the ram and to the side o aluminum foarre; ing big secret structure labeled They worked until "five o' Then they filed out and got into the waiting trucks and were hauled back to town; the boom town that had mushroomed up in the desert overnight and would die with the same swiftness when the project was completed. ing house, washed up, put on his good clothes, and found a stool in a nearby restaurant. He ate a ly supper, glancing now and again at the clock. When the clock rea eight, he went out into stained darkness and walked three blocks to the Black Gat, one o three night, clubs the boasted. He went to a slowly, carefully, of a man who A half-hour doggedsaid a way in trip le nervous the bar and ing it over?" "I need a V ft rid of i from the barkeep. After 'Two thousand "A e ?V Hout o' here # Nick They walked out of the town and the desert, Niek stumbling now and again, to be supported by the Joe. "Two thousand, ick. You need the dough Sure. Need the dough. But it wouldn't work. Couldn't get you into one o' them barrels." "You wouldn't have to. All I ask is that you come along in the morning and seal me up in one. All you'll have to do is lock on the lid." "How you know the barrel# are going on the ship?" Never mind about that. I just know. I paid to find out." Okay -- suppose you do get on the ship in a barrel. Maybe it'll be stored in A hold somewhere. Maybe they wouldn't open it very soon. You'd die." got a way to gbt out. One of them special torches. The little uminum isn't very strong, can cut it like butter." a-:  . You'd burn yourworry about that # Joe want the two c.  C ' two the wall a air-tight for exhappy . You'd own oxygen . clear to the Break  on. , "Okay have the dough His heart smerin counted out two : When he'd finished he ha nine dollars left. He was But the happiest pauper who ever bought with his whole fortune, thing he craved most. "You won't doublecross me now will you? If you've got any like that -- " "I'll do like we said. Nick Sparks never went back on his word -- never. But how you going to stay hid when it's time to leave work?" "Leave that to me. It'll be easy. They don't check Building B too close. No double check 'cause it's over a mile from Building A -- outside the safety perimeter. I'll stay in tomorrow night and I'll put a little chalkmark on the barrel I'm in -- right near the top ' rim. First thing you do when you come to work the next morning is seal it and line it up with the filled ones," "Okay, but I gotta go home now. I got a head. I gotta set sleep." w "Clean Joe pulled the way. The guard, denim but the towel. K   Building B. Getting past the guard was a load off his mind. He'd expected to get by, but it was one of the calculated risks tiiat could have stopped him cold. Once inside the building, he put the bag into his locker and went to work. He labored briskly and carried more than his share of the load. But now again he stopped to look over at the outline of Building A, limned hard against hot blazing sky. And each time it was with a sense of heady exhilaration that he thought of his destiny -- his hard earned, dearly bought destiny. To be among that select group who would first set foot upon the surface of the Moon! He had no worries about not being allowed to do so. Once he showed himself -- with the ship far out in space -- they'd have to accept him. Not graciously of course, but they'd have to admire his courage and tenacity. They could not in all humanity, deny him a share of th victory. The day wore on and as quitting time approached, he became more tense -- more alert. Five minutes before the whistle, he faded back into the building and hurried to the lavatory. He went into the booth furthest from the entrance and locked the door. Now there was nothing to do but wait. Another of the calculated risks. The whistle blew. Almost immediately, the sound of footsteps broke the silence and the lavatory was filled with hurrying men. Their stay in the room was short, however, as Joe had known it would be. Men leaving for home do not dawA die on the premises. The lavatory was empty again. A period of silence while Joe raised his feet from the floor and braced them on the toilet seat. The entrance door opened. A guard making the departure checkup. Joe held his breath. If the guard came down the line and tried the door, he was finished. But Joe had banked upon human nature. The guard stopped. For a long .moment there was no sound and joe knew the man was bending over to run his eves down the line of toilets close to the floor. In this manner he could see the floor of every booth. The guard straightened, turned, walked out. The door closed. Silence. Joe's heart swelled with gratitude. He grinned, looking forward with joy to the long night ahead. He found a spot over behind the barrels where the night watchman would have to climb over a lot of equipment in order to find him. He made himself comfortable, practically certain the guard would not do this. He stretched out on the hard floor and recorded the passing of the hours by the number of times the watchman went through. And he was surprised at how fast the time passed. Finally, checking his count carefully, he left his hiding place and tiptoed to the line of lockers. He took the oxygen equipment from the duffel bag after which he hid the bag and the clothing therein behind a wall flange in a far corner... Then he climbed into the barrel at the front end of the packing line. He checked the barrel with a small X and jockeyed the lid into place.  pened. He wondered if he'd missed on the time element. The men should certainly have come to work now. More than once he was fempted to push the barrel lid aside and checkthe situation. When footsteps sounded, close by, and the lid snapped firmly into place, he was glad he hadn't done so. Good old Nick! When he got back from the Moon, he'd see to it that Nick got credit for his courageous act. Soon the barrel began to move. Joe felt it rise into the air and settle with a thump. Then the motor of a truck roared and Joe knew where he was going. Straight toward Building A and the Moon rocket. There was more movement until finally the barrel was set down for what appeared to be the last time, joe put the nose-piece of the oxygen tube into place and visualized himself safe and snug in a storage room of the rocket. He closed his eyes and went peacefully to sleep. He slept a long time, to be awakened by a crushing -- a wrenching -- that all but drove his head down into his spine. The pain brought him sharply alert. He knew instant' ly what had happened. Blast-off. He braced himself against the sides of the barrel and gritted his teeth.  Soon it was better. Then no pressure at all. Only the fierce happiness on his heart. He'd set a course and won through! He was on the way to the Moon! Joe let plenty of time elapse. He knew it was well over an hour later when he unlimbered the torch to cut an escape-hole in the barrel. This, he knew, would be tricky. He could easily burn himself. The heat would be intense. But it wasn't too bad. The aluminum cut quickly and in a matter of minutes, he was standing beside his barrel. As he'd suspected, it was a storage hold. The pitch darkness did not bother him. He'd come prepared with a small pencil flash that threw an adequate beam. He found the door, opened it and went out into a long passageway... N OW HE'D covered the length and breadth of the ship. He'd found a lot of rooms -- all in pitchdarkness. No observation ports. And no living thing. He stood frozen in one of the rooms while the beam of his flash picked out a code stenciled n a steel plate over some piece of machinery. X#-#MY -- Experimental -- Explosion Rocket -- Moon. The flash dropped from Joe Spain's fingers. He stood in the pitch darkness while the jets vibrated through the rocket. But there was no fear in him. Only the great pain of futility. Only his tears, and his whispered words: "They'll never know. Nobody won't ever know!" jua was neauty -- sne wa. Fascination -- she was Death  Klia had a beautiful why not? She made it herse body . And streets by night, watching the crowds with eyes of gray steel, waiting for Klia's probing thoughts to touch some unwary Terrain Sooner or later she would t have to betray herself to him if she meant to pursue her goal. And then he would kill her and go. This was Ms task, set for him by the director of the Phoenician Quarantine Commission. He had been here six months, s far the only evidence of resence was a series of articles journal, written by Willa e author had access to in no information was prealmost humorspeculation it was ohio steer the certain were those of the paranoid, but having matured in a society where such patterns were the norm, she was neither insane nor neurotic. Her mind was keen, and her grfals were those of the predator... San Rorrck had tq find and kill her quickly. He watched the streets by night because her race and his were both non-sleepers. They were capable resting a part of the brain at a time having two cortical areas for bodily function. He knew she won become bored by ni tivity; sooner or later she come w city slept. In what findher? Her pearance did not c ran standards. #owy, nearly a! ightly i natura.  control her circulatory and glandular systems in such a way that fatty deposits would appear where she desired them and disappear in other places so that she could change her features and her form at will, as he himself had done. Of one thing he was certain : Her paranoid pride would not permit her to assume a guise regarded as ugly by this world. Most certainly she would make herself strikingly beautiful. San Rorrek however had reduced his body-weight, padded his cheekbones to give himself a gaunt appearance, dyed his hair black and his skin a sallow shade. An irritant, rubbed into pinpricks on his face, resulted in mild acne that made him something less than handsome. He smeared his teeth with brown stain, wore shabby second-hand clothing, and a pair of plain-rimmed glasses. He was not here to attract attention ; he was here to kill. He looked like a peddler or a laborer out of a job. He was walking down a sidestreet at midnight when he caught the first faint aura of her presence. She was somewhere within a few blocks, and she was planting a suggestion in the mind of the Terran who would not recognize the source of the thoughts as stemming from outside his own consciousness.  Sweee-whew! Thai dame on the corner! Did she look at me? Think Til walk that way. This was it! San had not reached out to touch the Terran # s mind, for in doing so he would broadcast his own thought-aura and reveal his presence to Klia. He had merely listened to Kfia's planting of the thought in the Terran s mind, and he caught the general direction from whence it came. He began walking rapidly up the street, then cut through the blackness of an alley. Was she playing games, or had she chosen a Terran to be of some service to her? Perhaps she was bored, and only wanted a brief love-affair... paused to peer toward both intersections. There were a few people on the sidewalk, but no woman tail enough to be Klia. He jaywalked and darted down the next alleyway. If the Terran had responded immediately to her suggestion, they would perhaps be gone before he could reach them. But then he caught another brief flash of thought-not words, but an image. She was helping the Terran imagine what she might look like without clothing. San chuckled as he trotted ahead. Unknowingly, she had given him a clue as to her appearance. Through glandular control, she had apparently padded herself to a remarkable condition of mammalian grandiloquence. The effect was almost surrealistic; the way a male might design a female if he had any choice in the matter. "You liked that, eh?" snarlecl a quiet voice from the darkness of a doorway. He stopped abruptly  in mid, alley, caught in a puddle of moonlight. She had tricked him. There had been no Ter ran. The phoney suggestion had been a trap. He glanced quickly around. "Don't move," she snapped. "I've got a native gun on. you -- a projectile weapon, in case you aren't familiar with their artifacts." Fie stood in stony silence, staring at the doorway until he made out her faint shadow. There was a tiny venom-gun strapped to his wrist, but its action would not be immediate, and if he used it, she would have ample time to kill him before she died. If it came to that he would use it, but now he hesitated, trying to piece together her immediate intentions. He shrugged and grinned. "Okay. So I lost. Shoot and get it over with." "Not here. They'd run an autopsy on you, pastoral. They'd figure you weren't quite Terran." "Fm no pastoral. Pm an inventive." "It's all the same to me, Rorrek. You're a lousy Thirder, Now move! Stay in the moonlight and walk slow. Stop when you come to the street. HI be right behind you." "Where are we going?" "Shut up! And don't start making suggestions at a policeman, or I'll kill you." Rorrek started walking. He felt her thoughts scanning lightly through various regions of consciousness-patterns until she found a taxi-driver. Then: I gotta hunch there's a customer on the next street . Think Til turn right. The taxi was approaching the alley entrance as they emerged. "Flag it," she ordered. Rorrek obeyed grim-lipped. "You get in first, darling," she said in a pleasant tone. "I like to sit on the right" "That's just because I'm right handed, dear," he purred acidly. "Where to, sir?" Out of the city , the girl ordered Rorrek wordlessly. Tell him . "Ask her. She's boss." The gun jabbed him ruthlessly in the ribs. The driver grinned. "Where to, lady?" She hesitated. "A long trip?" "I low long?" "Oh, thirty, forty miles. North." "It'll cost you." "That's all right. Will twenty dollars do it?" "Maybe. Watch the meter and double it. You'll have to pay both ways." "Let's go." Rorrek glanced at her sourly as they moved through the traffic. She had been exaggerating only slightly with the mental image used to trap him. The platinum blonde hair, the gray eyes, the aristocratic features, the full, slightly cynical mouth -- she conformed perfectly to the beauty standards of this world. The black dress revealed things that would have won her first place in any of the inane native female contests. "You've done well by yourself, I see," he said, eyeing the expensive clothing and jewelry. What tele path couldn't? And stop talking aloud . He watched her for a moment. The gun was in her handbag. So was her hand. And she was keeping a sharp eye on him. Rorrek frowned No opening yet. Where are we going? Someplace where you can dig a hole without being seen.  Rorrek stared ahead at the traffic for a moment. He didn't need to ask her what the hole was for. ing an intersection and the light was just changing from green to red. Having heard the girl summon the taxi, Rorrek knew the man's consciousness pattern. He adjusted to it quickly and planted a rapid suggestion: Damn the light ! I can make it! The girl cursed and lifted the handbag. The light was already red. A car shot out from the other street. The brakes screamed. A policewhistle shrilled angrily. "Shoot," Rorrek dared, smirking at Klia. The handbag hesitated. "Make a wrong move and I'll have to." The driver was too busy with his own troubles to hear them. The cop came stalking across the pavement. "You like to live dangerously, huh?" he said in a bored voice. The cabby began a plaintive explanation. "Come on, dear," said Klia. "We'll catch another cab " "I like this one,"  Get out , or Fll kilt you and the cop too. Pay the driver. Rorrek handed the driver a dollar. They crossed to the sidewalk and the girl looked shaken. This was a busier street and there were  m more pedestrians. He grinned at her again. "May I buy you a drink before you finish me off?" Surprisingly, she replied, "Fll let you live that long, pastoral. It's interesting to watch you try to wiggle out of it." He knew she meant it. She could have hypnotized the cop and the driver, shot him in the cab, and strolled calmly away as one of a dozen multiple mental images. She could still do it, but evidently the idea of making him dig his own grave appealed to her icy sense of humor. They entered a small bar and she directed him toward a secluded booth. "I'm surprised you haven't used your wrist weapon yet," she said as they sipped a martini. "Apparently you pastorals have no capability for self-sacrifice." His face showed no surprise, but he rested his arm across the table. He smirked. "I was waiting for a better opportunity, but since you put it that way let's get it over with." His other hand darted toward the lethal wrist. "One moment," she said. He paused. "Do you have an extra projectile?" He frowned, then nodded. She smiled again, and laid a braceleted white arm across the table. "I'll skve you the trouble of firing. Prick me with it." His throat started with surprise. "You're not immune," he hissed. "To Ayoyo venom? Try me." Rorrek gained new admiration for her. The process of immunization was an excruciatingly painful treatment covering three years and mean but this for a and she Correct, pastoral us from sent us to an ironhe pro #k i "Fm an inventive." "An artificial category. An inventive is a maladjusted pastoral who wishes he were I a Klidd." Her use of the ancient feudal name for her race startled him. His people had almost forgotten it. Once on Nu Phoenicis IV there had been the Klidds, or barons, the Algum or serfs, and the Taknon, or artisans. The feudal system had lasted more than five thousand years, and because of natural selection operating within the occupational groups, the three classes had become genetically distinct. After the rise of a technology, the Klidds were overthrown and exiled to the ironless fourth planet where they formed their own ruthless social order under a strict space quarantine, enforced by the Taknon spaceforce which Rorrek served. ;uing heredity with he said. " ss your t s go, .e signals. Terran idiom," he company is youryou, if I know yomre A smile, these people, a casual Iran the room a  like you can find me, cr : drive and provin nicis has habitable planets. T let's see you stop us." He . nodded thoughtfully, that's the picture. You get Terra to send ships to your world peering no human life there. The ships come back to Terra full of your people, ready to take over. Then you get your hands on Terran iron and steel to use in attacking my people." "In general, yes." Her gray eyes were icy calm, and she hated him with a fierceness that he could feel hated him as a symbol of the race who had exiled her people. "You're pathetic," he said quietly. ' She flushed, then her face went hard. Pie bored in. U I have  always felt inte: sorry for your asinine emotion # ? No Klidd could endure turned white and hissed a her native tongue. He I probe in her when she squeezed her gun, he was on ing the table crashed down as tfc The bullet tore out with a to roar, the people cringing tobelongings and called a cab, ward the walls. A police-whistle An hour later he was aboard a made an ear-shocking screech as flight for San Francisco. There was the traffic cop from the corner no returning to his home planet came lumbering in to investigate. for he had ditched the ship at sea "Dont anyone move! # he bel-. lest it be found by Terrans, Such lowed, and charged across the were the quarantine regulations, room toward Rorrek, who was He felt certain that Klia had done about to kick Klia's temple to inthe same with her stolen Hydrian sure her death. His foot froze and ship for another reason: Lest it be settled to the floor. found by a commission agent such "Call an ambulance," the cop as himself. Also, her plan for leadbawled at the manager. "Everying Terrans spaceward, luring body stay back!"  them to Phoenicis IV, and taking Rorrek began, "It was purely their ships, required that they conan -- " ' tinue in their naive belief that "Don't say anything. Just stand there and keep your hands in sight." Rorrek kept his hands in sight. He stared at the cop, suggesting nausea, suggesting a fluttering of the heart, suggesting asphyxiation. The cop began to gasp and reel. Rorrek increased the mental dosage. The cop choked and fainted. As Rorrek walked calmly out into the night, he heard voices behind him telling that the girl was dead. He felt sick himself now. There was something compelling about Klia, something that attracted. He felt a little like a child,  drawn toward a cruel mother -- or Terra possessed the only human life in the galaxy. So he was stuck here for life unless a Taknon ship came to pick him up, and there had been no guarantee of that from the Commission. Secret landings on nonspacegoing planets were forbidden except in several specifically defined emergencies. Rescuing a second-class agent was not one of them. , He was faced with a life of ease but of loneliness. A telepath would have no difficulty acquiring tremendous wealth here, but a telepath would have no company -- unless he could find a few natives a husband, lured to a wantonly selfish and unfaithful mistress. He knew she had to be killed, yet now that it was done, he felt rotten inside. At last he found a doctor and had his flesh-wound dressed. Fie stared at the doctor peculiarly and the medic seemed to forget it had been a bullet wound. Rorrek went 'i whose neural associative circuits were so ordered as to make telepathy latently possible. Occasionally he had encountered a Terran whose thought-aura was vaguely perceptible. Perhaps, through long and patient hypnotic conditioning, their latent abilities could be brought forth. If the genetic hodgepodge could be straightened out, Terran had high possibilities. Their" basic genetic emotion-patterns were not as sharply divided into groups a those of Nu Phoenicis, but the patterns were present, and the conflict among them was present. Rather than calling them Pastorals, Inventives, and Imperials, as in the Phoenician case, he decided perhaps that the basic Terran-pattems could best be described by the goals they were inclined to favor. The "Security-Seekers", the "Knowledge-Seekers", and the "GlorySeekers" perhaps. Phoenician code forbade any tampering with non-threat cultural forms, but who was there to enforce it? And in a sense, this was his planet now. Marooned here, he could participate in a subtle way, and help a few local inventives find new directions. Maybe he owed who would certainly have steered them spaceward, although the end result would have been disastrous for them, had her plan worked. Francisco he spent replenishing his funds through poker games, wrestling matches, and various forms of betting in which thoughtprojective powers were a distinct advantage. Then he rented a house in the suburbs, ordered half a ton of various electronic parts, and began building several computer units while he concentrated on revising his physical appearance to a more pleasing form. As the weeks passed, he put on weight, removed the fatty tissue from his cheekbones, thickened his cheeks enough to remove the gauntness, and restored his complexion to a healthier hue. When he was finished, he had the appearance of a gregarious young businessman, cleanly attractive but not offensively handsome. He finished the computer shortly after he finished himself. It was not a large unit as computers went. It was built into a chassis the size of an eight-foot refrigerator. A Terran might say it was constructed to handle problems in that rarefied strata of mathematics known as the Von Neumann theory of games. But the twenty-four instruments on its face were calibrated in "points per share". Rorrek spent a month in libraries, photographing stock-market reports covering a thirty-year period. These he laboriously studied, plotting the rise and fall of each stock on graphs, writing empirical equations to describe each graph, and feeding the equations to the computer's memory tanks. Fed also into the tanks, were thirty-year record-equations describing taxrates, population growth, national income, government expenditures, world armaments, exports, imports, and average individual incomes. The computer, required to assume that all the variables were dependent upon one another, evolved an implicit function in some thirtyseven variable quantities. He then fed it the "present conditions" and required it to extrapolate the values forward over a period of two months. Eleven stocks appeared due for sharp rises within the period. San Rorrek invested ten thousand dollars. At the end of two months, the stocks had risen fifteen thousand. He corrected the small errors in the computer's estimates by supplying new data, then extrapolated again, selling and reinvesting in accordance with the new predictions. There was danger, of course, that a completely unpredictable series of events might occur to cause unfavorable market fluctuations. Therefore he very carefully watched world conditions, political developments, and technical advancements. Klia's articles were still appearing in magazines and technical journals, but that was not surprising, considering the usual lag between the acceptance of an essay and its publication. And the pieces were having subtle repercussions in the news, attracting no attention in themselves, but spurring certain scientists to think along new lines. Klia had suggested a method for testing basic mental formative patterns in infancy; and now a western university's psychology department was setting up a research lab "for studying the basic affective reaction patterns of infants at birth". Klia, under another pen-name, had suggested an extension of relativistic mechanics to cover hypothetical N-dimensional universes. The newspapers announced now that the famous mathematician, Larwich, was beginning work on the creation of a mathematical physics with no basic assumptions other than those of elementary arithmetic. "Man's only insight into reality," said Larwich, "derives  from his ability to count on his fingers. All else is purely experiential approximation." Rorrek grinned. Klia had been " trying to steer Terran inventors straight toward a fivespace interstellar drive, while the government  research in the hope of reaching the moon. She was trying to get the mathematicians to see the velocity of light as a constant only at one specific universe-level of five-space, and as a different constant at other levels. And she had managed to steer Larwich in the right direction. Only one thing was lacking: an experiential tie between observable reality and the theory Larwich would certainly develop. Without' it, the theory would remain merely abtruse mathematical speculation of an invariantive nature. Rorrek's fingers itched at the typewriter, longing to supply the missing suggestion. A guilt-reaction, he told himself, probably associated with Klia's death. Nevertheless he wrote an essay entitled "Origin of Interstellar Hydrogen", and sent it to a university press periodical. The article suggested that the spontaneous appearance of matter in the fourspace cosmos could be explained in terms of a five-space continuum with a circulation of matter along the fifth component. The essay was rejected with a brief note from the editor: "Sorry, but we just last week purchased an essay dealing with the mechanics of this 'continuous creation # notion. Your style is good. Try us again, .soon. Editor. # ' Rorrek snorted and chucked the essay in the wastebasket. Some local yokel had probably beat him to the draw with some weirdly empirical notion that left out the tie with five-space. The rejection irritated him. He decided to give it up for a while, and concentrate on making himself Dr. Larwich was in San Francisco for the summer. After some debate about the desirability of direct intervention, he found the professor's address -- a modest cottage overlooking the bay with a short stretch of narrow beach before it. half a mile away. Three days later he wandered I past the professor's cottage, having spied three brown todies sunbathing on the beach before it. As he drew nearer, he studied them curiously. An elderly couple and a girl in her late twenties, possibly Larwich's daughter. She was watching him casually -- a large, dark girl with hazel eyes and firm breasts. Rorrek approached 'the group. "Am I still on a public beach?" he asked, "Or am I a trespasser?" The elderly couple glanced up questioningly. The girl smiled. "Trespassers are welcome. Help yourself." She had a nice musical voice. "I've got the next cottage down the line," he said. "Bui I scarcely realized I had neighbors." "It is lonely out here. Won't you sit with us awhile? You look tired." Rorrek grinned and patted a slight bulge in his mid-section. "Trying to work off my bay window." He strolled toward them, scraping his feet in the sand. The old man looked down at his own sagging belly, then glowered at the stranger. "Young man, you have just committed a grievous faux pas, # ' he grunted. "I'm Edith Larwich," said tke girl. "This is my father. Frank Larwich... and my mother, Louise." He nodded and sat down. "I'm Sam Rory." He hesitated, looking at the professor and gathering a frown. "Larwich -- Frank Larwich -- I've heard of you, I think. Is it Doctor Larwich -- of the new-look in invariantive viewpoints?" The old man looked surprised. He lifted his eyebrows first at his wife, then his daughter. He extended his hand to Rorrek and looked a beam of amusement down his slender nose. "Young man, you have just absolved yourself of that faux pas. What school are you with?" "No school." "What research lab, then?" "No lab, I'm a gambler." "Bah! Stop joking. Laymen don't talk about invariance, or remember the names of old codgers like me." i He shrugged, "I apologize for being a layman, sir, but I like mathematics. I've read a few of your pieces in the digest." Larwich glanced at his wife and daughter again. They were looking curiously at Rorrek. "My fame comes as a distinct shock to me," the old man said tea n#  V mm a it?  n managed to rom her body, beauty were to appeal to him, o you expect to publish theory. Doctor?" he  # casually runted the I expect to publish it within a few months. It's comm along much faster than I thought. In fact, it scares me sometimes." Rorrek fell briefly thoughtful. Any man would could work that theory out in a few months was certainly the mental equal of the best minds of his own race. It startled him. Here seemed proof enough that T erran-humanity was going places, given a little intelligent biosocial reform. "That's remarkable," he murmured,. "I thought it would be at least two years," "So did I. But Edith here helped me tremendously with certain down-to-earth suggestions. It may seem unbelievable to you, but I think this tiling is going to have applications, certain observable phe n ooked sharply at the girl, at him, faintly with eyes. The old man u it's mention in physics, some possible :v :ween my "Such as taneous creation quietly The amusement gir. is really a him to any poker grinned at the visitor # is remarkable. We # sU   better acquainted He murmured felt a vague uneasiness, lie come to plant a hint of the correlation in the mathematician's mind, but now there was no to do so. When Harwich was through, physicists could build an experimental five-space generator on the basis of his theory. When the physicists were through making data-tables, engineers would be able to construct a working model interstellar drive, provided someone would make the investment. Rorrek, busy making a fortune in the stock-market, musingly saw himself as angel for the first s Edith stood up, tuggin suit to cover a streak of white She smiled down at him, " I'll swim. Care to join me?" "Leave Turn here for a will you?" grunted Harwich. Rorrek nodded at meet you in the water. She lithe, brown, "Your daughter ful, sir," "Eh ? Oh self marvel fa C "In personality. You see, she was nearly blind until a few months ago. Cataracts. And she was always so retiring, quiet and introspective. IPs remarkable what the removal of a physical defect can do for a girl's personality. You wouldn't call her shy and retiring now, would you?" "Not at all, Quite friendly, I'd say. Rorrek watched her plunging gracefully in the surf, and he wondered at his vague uneasiness.  "What do you really do, Sam?" Larwich asked. "Investor. I hit it lucky on the market. Gambler -- same thing " . Larwich chuckled. "You evidently read technical publications as a hobby, then. Or are you working on a mathematical way to beat the stock market?" Rorrek smiled enigmatically, and got to his feet. "You might try the Von Neumann theory of games," he offered, then smiled sheepishly. "If you'll excuse me, I think I'll join  your daughter for a swim." feeble breakers when he trotted through the shallow water, but she rolled on her back to wave ' and watch him. A very beautiful, intelligent girl, he thought calculating! y. If he were to remain marooned on Terra, it would be interesting to see if normal procreation could result from marriage with a native. He felt an urge to touch the girl's mind, then decided against it for the present. Some Terr an s seemed sensitively receptive, and they became startled by undue power. She lay treading water until he swam up beside her, then she smiled but her eyes were thoughtful. "Water's nice!" he grunted. "Is it?" He frowned. "Why the challen ing tone ?" Who are you, anyway?" Just who I said I was. Sam Rory, gambler, investor." She said nothing more about It, but her eyes were suspicious. They U # swam in silence for a time, then she called. "How's the beach downV ' at your place?" He hesitated. Was she angling? "Just fine " he said. "Why don't you come down?" She lifted her wet head from the tide and nodded soberly. "I will. Very soon." Again he felt the vague uneasiness. Rorrek spent the afternoon on his porch, watching the bay. Tomorrow he meant to go back to the suburbs, return to the task of making hirnself the wealthiest man in the country as quickly as possible, then start endowing universities with research grants like a fat old capitalist with a guilty conscience. Twilight came, and he felt the loneliness of an alien longing for home. He visualized the warm, rollwith pastoral Algun villages, and the great walled city-states of the Taknon, covering hundreds of square miles and set in the midst of the Algun landscape. They worked in harmony, the two races -- each maintaining its own government, each keeping itself socially and biologically separated, yet each realizing that one could not exist and prosper without the other. It was a class society that worked, worked because the classes were divided according to the goals they sought, not according to any artificial framework. Of course, Man's goals were chosen in the light of his emotions and aptitudes, and at least among the Phoenicians, emotion and aptitude patterns were founded on genetic bed-rock. It was only rarely that Taknon aptitudes were bom in an Algun village, and equally rare when a pastorally inclined child appeared in the Taknon cities. Loneliness weighed heavily on him. With some misgivings he closed his eyes, and searched through the transor regions for the Larwich girl's pattern of consciousness. When he passed through it, he started up with a low gasp -- and lost the pattern. There had been a knife-edge sharpness about it -- a clarity of focus that suggested resonant neural circuits as in the trained telepath. He groped for it again. But when he found it, the sharpness was gone -- if it had really been there. The transor was strong but blurred, unreadable. He decided his first impression had been illusion. I wonder what that young man is doing ? he suggested. He did invite me to his beach. Maybe if I walked down that way . He paused a moment, trying to catch the blurred images that swam in leisure through her consciousness. But they were too muddled. He withdrew from her and waited. Half-a-mile might be too far for the untrained mind to catch the faint suggestion, and even though she would mistake the thoughts for her own, she might offer herself some counter-excuse for not coming. the failing gray of twilight. After a few minutes, the screen door opened, and someone stood on the porch. Then she trotted down the steps to the beach and came walking his way, but looking toward the sea. As she drew nearer; he saw that she was wearing white shorts and a pale blue blouse with the tail knotted about her waist. The wind whipped the blouse against her breasts and ruffled her short dark hair like a nest of feathers. He watched her come toward him with narrow speculative eyes, and he wondered again: Was a procreative union possible here? She looked toward him and waved, breaking his reverie, then on apparently sudden impulse turned and plodded through the sand toward his porch. "Am I trespassing? Or did you invite me to your beach?" "Come on up," he called. "I was just wishing you'd drop by." She hooked her foot on the step and cocked her head at him. "Why?" It startled him. "The answer to that," he chuckled, "might be  found in textbooks of psychology and biology, particularly the latter. Come up and sit down." "Not if you're going to be biological #  "Only in t respectively so. I have insufficient data on the subject to feel safe in rash experiments." She laughed aid came up to take a chair, propping her long, trim legs on the rail. "The subject is a carnivore who might chew off an ear. #  "Mrnmp! How about a nice thick steak with onions and french fries and a gallon of beer?" "The bloated subject would fall asleep in her cage" "Exactly. # She watched him with cool amusement in the dusk. "I think we find each other attractive." "Tm glad it's mutual. I have plans for you. #  She dropped her legs, rested her elbows on her knees, and swung half around to grin peculiarly, head cocked up at him. "Okay, Sam. Finish the funny story.' He leaned toward her and tried to steal as softly as possible into her consciousness pattern, but he kept his voice light and casual. "The plan is simple biology, but it involves many unknowns as yet For instance -- " He pulled her face toward him slowly, and moulded her mouth with his. Quietly they slipped to their feet, locked tightly together, laughing quietly with soft fire where their faces touched. He brought his mind slowly into full resonance with her pattern, demanding her to respond. The response was white flame, but not of the body. His mind reeled for an instant before he understood. Full focus ! Too bright! And something hard against Ms ribs. You should have been born a Klidd! He backed away, staring at her, and the glint of metal in her hand. I wasn't certain , she went on until you threw that full resonance at me. "Klia!" "Yes." She found a cigaret with her left hand and lit it while she held the gun on him with her right. He could see her face in the match-flare, and it appeared tight and drawn. "Your lipstick is smeared," he offered. "Thanks. It was a pleasure. Fm really sorry I have to kill you " "Like you killed Larwich's blind daughter and took her place?" Klia snorted. "Shes not dead. She's still blind, and she's an amnesiac in a Pennsylvania psychopathic ward." "Hypnotically induced amnesia, undoubtedly. # "Right. I had to get her personality patterns, and leave her a blank" "I thought I left you dead on the floor." She sighed impatiently. "Would a Terran know when a Phoenician was dead?" Rorrek saw his blunder and' gritted his teeth. He'd been a fool to believe. Naturally, every time someone touched her wrist to test her pulse, she had simply stopped her heartbeat until the fellow let go, or perhaps shut off the circulation in the arm. "Well, you've got Larwich well on the road to the theory of a space drive, I see." She nodded, started to reply, paused, then: "You didn't suspect me because you thought I was dead. Then why did you come prowling around Larwich?" "To do what you've already done." "You're lying." "See for yourself," He began sliding into resonance with her, but she bached away warily and blocked him out. "You can break it whenever you want to," he said. She risked it, and their transors found sharp focus again. He reeled off the contents of his associative circuits relating to Larwich and his theory, reeled them off too rapidly for them to be inventions of the moment. Then he switched to memories concerning his thoughts of her. "Why did you do that?" she muttered when he was through. Her voice was shaky, and the gun seemed to be sagging in her hand. He shrugged. "We're a long way from Nu Phoenicis. I expect to be here for good." "You will be," she said ominously, straightening. "Start marching down to the water." "Why?" "The tide's going out. You'll go with it " "Suppose I suggest we work together," She laughed scornfully. "Move, quickly, Taknon!" He walked slowly down the steps and into the faint moonlight. He moved ahead with a calm leisurely tread. Behind him the girl laughed. "You're part Klidd, Rorrek. A hybrid -- or a throwback." He failed to ask her why. "I could feel affection for a Taknon, but I couldn't love one. Fve watched you. You're part Klidd. I can feel it." He wondered why his throat constricted. He said nothing. "I love you, Rorrek. Damn your hide." But she loved her planet more. "What are you going to do about Larwich now?" he asked coldly. "Are you going to switch to someone else, or are you going to keep on brazening it out?" "Switch. I'm through with him. He's on the right course," Rorrek started wading into shallow water. "Go on out past the breakers," she called. "I don't want you to wash back in." "Glad to oblige," he grunted, but he paused to look back. She had kicked off her sandals and was wading after him. She stopped, gun glinting in the moonlight. "Well?" "'One thing." He scanned for her mind, but she blocked, refusing him resonance. He bludgeoned through until he made a strong but fuzzy contact. He held the contact, but turned away and began wading through the gentle rush of breakers while he wandered through his associative circuits concerning Stop it, Rorrek! I Then the resonance was complete., and he chuckled, because she was going to feel it when she shot him. Beyond the breakers, he turned again to fac her. She was reeling dizzily, holding the gun at arm's length, with her left hand pressed tight to her face. shots when they came. Two went wide, but the third seared his chest, and he went down, fighting for air. hearing a choking scream from Kiia. He gasped once and went under, swimming weakly for deeper water. Another bullet streaked phosphorescence through the blackness about him. He drove still deeper, clinging precariously to consciousness. Another slug streaked under him ard he veered upward. Seven cartridges in the gun, five gone. If he could only live a little longer. Then he had to rise for air. He spun around and came up slowly, facing shore. She was walking dejectedly back across the beach toward his cottage. He waited for her to look back. He dog-paddled with the waves, but the tide seemed to be sweeping him out. "PraTaW Bladen, Klia! # he choked in their native tongue. "For the love of Man!" She heard him. She turned slowly, watched him coldly for a moment, pistol lifted high. " PraTalf Kliddn, TaknonV # came her icy paraphrase. The gun barked, and barked again. Seven! But this time it was his abdomen, and he heard himself screaming as he fought toward shore. He could only partially control the flow of blood to the wounds. When tissue cried for blood, the unconscious reflex let it go. It was like holding one's breath, and occasionally he had to bleed. She was standing there watching him, white in the moonlight, locked in a kind of trance. Co, he thought at her savagely. When I get there , Vll kill you -- for those last two shots. She looked at the gun in her hand. She let it drop, stared down at it, wiped the hand distastefully on her shorts. She backed away a step, stumbled in the sand, and sat down, rolling her head on her knees. He groped for her mind, and she erected no block. She hoped he would die before he got to shore, but she wasn't going to move. Fate, about to be satisfied -- it gave him angry strength. A breaker washed over him from behind, and he rode with it briefly. When it passed him by and dropped him, he stood chest-deep, wading shoreward. He peered at her dazedly, hands clenching and unclenching in anticipation. He let her feel the strength of his hate, but her thoughts were wandering -- her home, her people. But she saw them differently somehow, as if she were no longer capable of being guided by their values. Her affective framework had collapsed. She sat in a bewildered daze. He staggered from the water and fell to his knees on the sand. He crawled toward her with savage deliberation in the moonlight going to  a i v t him brittle shattered. She screamed and pawed at her face. He hit her again and again, rblling across the sand, battering her face until his fists were driving into wet pulp. "My eyes! My eyes!" Weakly he crouched over her, staring. She had been wearing contact lenses. The green irises had been stained on the glass to cover her gray ones. Now jagged slivers of glass protruded from under her eyelids. She rolled her head and moaned, trying to escape him. :s were coming down the beach, and Doc. Larwich was shouting frantically. Rorrek backed away from the girl. She came to her and began running blindly, toward a. sand embankn cry was drunkenly after her.     around the on the her into it. watching the her. Then she mg went to meet lurched for her. to a doctor," for her. She under his arm fist  my eyes , He let carlo usly to internal glaring lights him, and the car weave she used his guide her. He knew he had won stopped her, for as noiac culture, loss of deformity was cause and ridicule among the blinded Klidd, like a tribesman or Zulu warrior, was disgraced and ashamed. The only recourse was death. Why didn't she accept it then? He was waiting for her to ram the car into a truck or bridge, but she drove as straight as his failing sight would allow. tr L # ' A ert Honkler, Physician and Surgeon?' He stared at the white house, and the girl pulled to the curb. "Get out!" she ordered, but left the engine running and staye hind the wheel. So that w r as i here, and now. going to plunge "Why?" he "PraTak snapped with that masked of Man!" bii He. jerke "Let me go ! # We'll work together , Klia. We'U get these people into space , and somehow we'll help your people. She laughed bitterly. Help them? Yoy never gave them a chance! When the feudal order collapsed , the Taknon and the Algun adapted out you banished the Klidd without letting them find a place in the new society . You hated them too much as your former tyrants, "A place? What place could a Klidd -- # ' Administrators , coordinators , or ganizers. But you exiled us to a world without iron, condemned us to an eternal stone age . There is but one fundamental right of Man , Taknon! The right to try. You denied it to us , Footsteps were coming down the walk, and gentle hands were dragging them out of the car. Came blackness. When he awoke, he expected to iron bars, or the walls of a hospital room. Instead, he was in his own home in the suburbs. He tried move, and groaned. Something rustled in the room, "Lie still  # she said. He rolled his head weakly to look at her. She sat stiffly in a straightbacked chair by the window, morning sunlight playing in her hair. There was a bandage across her eyes. He groped for her mind, and found the answer. She had helped the doctor forget that he had ever seen three bulletwounds and a pair of ruined eyes. "As soon as you're able to get up, I'll go' she said coldly. "No. You'll stay. Well build ships. We'll get your people to a ferrous planet somehow -- an uninhabited one. If they can build a civilization from scratch, they deserve it." She stood up and faced the window for a time, soaking in the warm sunlight, and he allowed her the privacy of her thoughts. The right to try -- even for a race of power-grabbers . PraTalv  Bladen. For the love of Man. "My eyes  # she said dully. "He said there's not much chance." a it There is a chance ? # She shrugged. We still have one pair " And he showed her herself through them; showed her herself with ever-increasing daring blushed crimson.   But her hands reached out to him. until she  The little house pet from Venus di New York , so New York had to I I sound of the gun. He liked the way it slapped back against his shoulder when he fired. Somehow it did not seem a part of the dank, steaming Venusian jungle. Probably, he realized with a smile, it was the only old-fashioned recoil rifle on the entire planet. As if anyone else would want to use one of those old bone-cracking relics today! But they all failed to realize it made sport much more interesting. a vend seen anything for a Ms wife said, She had a ce and a strong you have money #uld really keep a woman looking f course. Venus frontier, a hot, dace that beck m a said, "That's true. Yesterday we could bag them one af ter the other, as fast as I could fire this contraption. Today, if there's anything bigger than a tnouse, it's hiding in a hole somewhere. You know what I think, Lindy?" "What?" "I think there's a reason for it. v A lot of the early Venusian hunters said there were days like this. An area filled with big lizards and cats and everything else the day before suddenly seems to clear out, for so reason. It doesn't make sense."' Why not? Why cou : decide to make tra just decide t place else on at an m a.:buzzing around his ri mopped his sweating and peo; hunter. He ' lot of money O ' . ting his wife's trim shoulder under the white tunic. "No, Lindy. It just doesn't work that wav. Not on .   Earth and ndt on Venus, either. You think there's a piedpiper or something which calls all the animals away?" "Maybe. I don't know much about those things." "No. I don't think they went anyplace. They're just quiet. They didn't come' out of their holes or hovels or down from the trees. But why ?" "Well, let's forget it. Let's go back to camp. We can try again tomor -- look! Look, there's something!" Judd followed her pointing finger with his eyes. Half-hidden by the creepers and vines clinging to an old ' tree-stump, something was watching them. It wasn't very big and it seemed in no hurry to get away. "What is it?" Lindy wanted to know. "Don't know. Never saw anything like it before. Venus is still an unknown frontier; the books only name a couple dozen of the biggest animals. But hell, Lindy, that's not game. I don't think it weighs five pounds." "It's cute, and it has a lovely skin." Judd couldn't argue with that. Squatting on its haunches, the creature was about twenty inches tall. It had a pointed snout and two thin, long ears. Its eyes were very big and very round and quite black. They looked something like the eyes of an Earth! an tarsier, hut the tarsier were bloody little beasts. The skin was short and stiff and was a ft kind of silvery white. Under the sheen, however, it seemed to glow. A diamond is colorless, Judd thought, but "when you see it under light a whole rainbow of colors sparkle deep within it. This creature's skin was like that, Judd decided. "If we could get enough of them," Lindy was saving, "Fd have the most unusual coat! Do you think we could find enough, Judd?" "I doubt it. Never saw anything like it before, never heard of anything like it. You'd need fifty of 'em, anyway. Let's forget about it -- too small to shoot, anyway." "No, Judd. I want it." "Well, I'm not going to stalk a five-pound -- hey, wait a minute! I taught you how to use this rifle, so why don't you bag it?" Lindy grinned. "That's a fine idea. I was a little scared of some of those big lizards and cats and everything, but now I'm going to take you up on it. Here, give me your gun." Judd removed the leather thong from his shoulder and handed the weapon to her. She looked at it a little uncertainly, then took the clip of shells which Judd offered and slammed it into the chamber. The little creature sat unmoving. "Isn't it peculiar that it doesn't run away, Judd?" "Sure is. Nothing formidable about that animal, so unless it has a hidden poison somewhere, just about anything in this swamp could do it in. To survive it would have to be fast as hell and it would have to keep running all the time. Beats me, Lindy " "Well, Tm going to get myself one pelt toward that coat, anyway. Watch, Judd: is this the way?" She lifted the rifle to her shoulder and squinted down the sights toward the shining creature. "Yeah, that's the way. Only relax. Relax. Shoulder's so tense you're liable to dislocate it with the kick. There -- that's better." Now Lindy's finger was wrapped around the trigger and she remembered Judd had told her to squeeze it, not to pull it. If you pulled the trigger you jerked the rifle and spoiled your aim. You had to squeeze it slowly... The animal seemed politely interested. Suddenly, a delicious languor stole over Lindy. It possessed her all at once and she had no idea where it came from. Her legs had been stiff and tired from the allmorning trek through the swamp, but now they felt fine. Her whole body was suffused in a warm, satisfied glow of well-being. And laziness. It was an utterly new sensation and she could even feel it tingling even at the roots of her hair. She sighed and lowered the rifle. "I don't want to shoot it," she said. "You just told me you did." "I know, but I changed my mind. What's the matter, can't I change my mind?" "Of course you can change your mind. But I thought you wanted a coat of those things." "Yes, I suppose I do. But I don't want to shoot it, that's all," Judd snorted. "I think you have a streak of softness someplace in that pretty head of yours!" "Maybe. I don't know. But I'd still like the pelt. Funny, isn't it?" "Okay, okay! But don't ask to use the gun again." Judd snatched it from her hands. "If you don't want to shoot it, then I will we can make you a pair of or something from the pelt." And Judd pointed his ancient rifles at the little animal preparing to snap off a quick shot. It would be a cinch at this distance. Even Lindy wouldn't have missed, if she hadn't changed her mind. Judd yawned. He'd failed to realize he was so tired. Not an aching kind of tiredness, but the kind that makes you feel good all over. He yawned again and lowered the rifle. "Changed my mind," he said. "I don't want to shoot it, either. What say we head back for camp?" Lindy gripped his hand impulsively. "All right, Judd -- but I had a brainstorm! I want it for a pet!" "A pet?" "Yes. I think it would be the cutest thing. Everyone would look and wonder and I'll adore it!" "We don't know anythin! it. Maybe Earth would be too cold, or too dry, or maybe we don't have anything it can eat. There are liable to be a hundred different strains of bacteria that can kill it." "I said I want it for a pet. See? Look at it! We can call it tc Eyes" Black Eyes -- " Judd groaned. Yes, Black Eyes. If you don't do this one thing for me, Judd -- " , ut I'm not to do any tiling. You want it, you take it." Lindy frowned, looked at him crossly, then sloshed across the swamp toward Black Eyes. The creature waited on its stump until she came quite close, and then, with a playful little bound, it hopped onto her shoulder, still squatting on its haunches. Lindy squealed excitedly and began to stroke its silvery fur. to Earth, Judd and Lindy and Black Eyes. The hunting trip had been a success -- Judd's trophies were on their way home on a slow' freighter, and he'd have some hne heads and skins for his study-room. Even Black Eyes had been no trouble at all. It ate scraps from their table, forever sitting on its haunches and staring at them with its big black eyes. Judd thought it would make one helluva lousy pet, but he didn't tell Lindy. Trouble was, it never did anything. It merely sat still, or occasionally it would bounce down to the floor and mince along on its hind-legs for a scrap of food. It never uttered a sound. It did not frolic and it did not gambol. Most of the time it could have been carved from stone. But Lindy was happy and Judd said nothing. They had a little trouble with the customs officials. This because nothing unknown could be brought to Earth without a thorough examination. At the customs office, a bespectacled official stared at Black Eyes, scratching his head. "Never seen one like that before' "Neither have I," Judd admitted. "Well, I'll look in the book." The man did, but there are no thorough tomes on Venusian fauna. "Not here." "I could have told you." "Well, we'll have to quarantine it and study it. That means .you and your wife go into quarantine, too. It could have something that's catching." "Absurd!" Lindy cried. "Sorry, lady. I only work here." "You and your bright ideas," Judd told his wife acidly. "We may be quarantined a month until they satisfy themselves about Black Eyes." The customs official shrugged Ms bony shoulders; and Judd removed a twenty credit note from his pocket and handed it to the man. "Will this change your mind?" "I should say not! You can't bribe me, Mr. Whitney! You can't -- " The man yawned, stretched languidly, smiled. "No sir, you can keep your money, Mr. Whitney. Guess we don't have to examine your pet after all. Mighty cute little feller. Well, have fun with it. Come on, move along now." And, as they were departing with Black Eyes, still not believing their ears: "Darn this weather! Makes a man so lazy... It was after the affair at the customs office, that Black Eyes uttered its first sound. City life hasn't changed much in the last fifty years. Jet-cars still streak around the circumferential highways, their whistles blaring. Factories still belch smoke and steam, although the new s atomic power plants have lessened that to a certain extent. Crowds still throng the streets, noisy, hurrying, ill-mannered. Ids one of those things that can't be helped, A city has to live, and it has to make noise. But it seemed to frighten Lindy's new pet. It stared through the jetcar window on the way from the spaceport to the Whitney's suburban home, its black eyes welling with tears. "Look!" Judd exclaimed. "Black Eyes can cry!" "A crying pet, Judd. I knew there would be something unusual about Black Eyes, I just knew it!" The tears in the big black eyes overflowed and tumbled out, rolling down Black Eyes' silvery cheeks. And then Black Eyes whimpered. It was only a brief whimper, but both Judd and Lindy heard it, and even the driver turned around for a moment and stared at the animal. The driver stopped the jet. He yawned and rested his head comfortably on the cushioned seat. He went quietly to sleep. owned the Merrywinkle Shipping Service. That, in itself, was not unusual. But at precisely the moment that Black Eyes unleashed its mild whimper, Mr. Merrywinkle -- uptown and five miles away -- called an emergency conference of the board of directors and declared: "Gentlemen, we have all been working too hard, and I, for one, am going to take a vacation. I don't know when I'll be back, but it  won't be before six months;" "But someone protested. "There's the Parker deal and the Gilette contract and a dozen other things. You're needed!" Mr. Merrywinkle shook his bald head. "What's more, you're all taking vacations, with pay. Six months, each of you. We're closing down Merrywinkle Shipping for half a year. Give the competition a break, eh?" "But C.M.! We're about ready to squeeze out Chambers Parcel Co.! They'll get back on their feet in six months." "Never mind. Notify all departments of the shut-down, effective immediately. Vacations for all.' # belt?" the foreman asked mildly. He was not a mild man and he usually stormed and ranted at the slightest provocation. This was at Clewson Jctcraft, and you couldn't produce a single jet-plane without the assembly belt, naturally. A plump little man said, "I did." "But why?" the foreman asked him, smiling blandly. "I don't know. I just did." The foreman was still smiling. "I don't blame you." Two days later, Clewson Jetcraft had to lay off all its help. They put ads in all the papers seeking new personnel but no one showed up. Clewson was forced to shut down. York pneumo-tube commuter's special pulled to a bone-jarring stop immediately outside the New York station. Some angry commuters pried open the conductor's cab, and found the man snoozing quite contentedly. They awakened him, but he refused to drive the train any further. All the commuters had to leave the pneumotrain and edge their way along three miles of catwalk to the station, No one was very happy about it,but the feeling of well-being which came over them all nipped any possible protest in the bud. when Judd and Lindy reached home but after that it was quiet. It just sat on its haunches near the window and stared out at the city. The quiet city. Nothing moved in the streets. Nothing stirred. People remained at home watching local video or the new space-video from Mars. At first it was a good joke, and the newspapers could have had a field day with it, had the newspapers remained in circulation. After four days, however, they suspended publication. On the fifth day, there was a shortage of food in the city, great stores of it spoiling in the warehouses. Heat and light failed after a week, and the fire department ignored all alarms a day later. But everything did not stop. School teachers still taught their classes; clerks still sold whatever goods were left on local shelves. Librarians were still at their desks. Conservatives said it was a liberal plot to undermine capital and demand higher wages; liberals said big business could afford the temporary layoff and wanted to squeeze out the small businessman and labor unions. Scientists pondered and city officials made speeches over video. "Something," one of them observed, "has hit our city. Work that requires anything above a modicum of sound has become impossible; in regards to such work people have become lazy. No one can offer any valid suggestions concerning the malady. It merely exists. However, if a stop is not put to it -- and soon -- our fair city will disintegrate. Something is making us lazy, and that laziness can spell doom, being a compulsive lack of desire to create any noise or disturbance. If anyone believes he has the solution, he  should contact the Department of Science at once. If you can't use the video-phone, come in person. But come! Every hour which passes adds to the city's woes." ' Nothing but scatter-brained ideas for a week, none of them worth consideration. Then the bespectacled custom's official who had bypassed quarantine for Black Eyes, got in touch with the authorities. He had always been a conscientious man -- except for that one lapse. Maybe the queer little beast had nothing to do with this crisis. But then again, the custom's official had never before -- or since -- had... that strange feeling of lassitude. Could there be some connection? A staff of experts on extra-terrestrial fauna was dispatched to the Whitney residence, although, indeed, the chairman of the Department of Science secretly considered the whole idea ridiculous. The staff of experts introduced themselves. Then, ignoring the protests of Lindy, went to work on Black Eyes. At first Judd thought the animal would object, but apparently it did not. While conditions all about' them in the city worsened, the experts spent three days studying Black Eyes. They found nothing out of the ordinary. Black Eyes merely stared back at them, and but for an accident, they would have departed without a lead. On the third day, a huge mongrel dog which belonged to the Whitney's next-door neighbors somehow slipped its leash. It was a fierce and ugly animal, and it was known to attack anything smaller than itself. It jumped the fence and landed in Judd Whitney's yard. A few loping bounds took it through an open window, ground level. Inside, it spied Black Eyes and made for the creature at once, howling furiously. Black Eyes didn't budge. And the mongrel changed its mind! The slavering tongue withdrew inside the chops, the howling stopped. The mongrel lay down on the floor and whined. Presently it lost all interest, got to its feet, and left as it had come. Other animals were brought to the Whitney home. Cats. Dogs. A lion from the city zoo, starved for two days and brought in a special mobile cage by its keeper. Black Eyes was thrust into the cage and the lion gave forth with a hideous yowling. Soon it stopped, rolled over, and slept. their reports, returned with them to the Whitney house. The leader, whose name was Jamison, said: "As closely as we can tell, Black Eyes is the culprit." "What?" Lindy demanded. "Yes, Mrs. Whitney. Your pet, Black Eyes." "Oh, I don't believe it!" But Judd said, "Go ahead, Dr. Jamison. I'm listening." "Well, how does an animal -- any animal -- protect itself?" "Why, in any number of ways. If it has claws or a strong jaw and long teeth, it can fight. If it is fleet of foot, it can run. If it is big and has a tough hide, most other animals can't hurt it anyway. Ummmm, doesn't that about cover it?" "You left out protective coloration, defensive odors, and things like that. Actually, those are most important from our point of view, for Black Eyes' ability is a furtherramification of that sort of thing. Your pet is not fast. It isn't strong. It can't change color and it has no offensive odor to chase off predatory enemies. It has no armor. In short, can you think of a more helpless creature to put down in those Venusian swamps?" After Judd had shaken his head, Dr. Jamison continued: "Very well, Black Eyes should not be able to survive on Venus -- and I yet, obviously the creature did. We can assume there are more of the breed, too. Anyway, Black Eyes survives. And I'll tell you why. "Black Eyes has a very uncommon ability to sense danger when it approaches. And sensing danger,  I Black Eyes can thwart it. Your creature sends out certain emanations -- I won't pretend to know what they are -- which stamp aggression out of any predatorycreatures. Neither of you could fire upon it -- right?" "Urnm-mm, that's true Judd said. Lindy nodded. "Well, that's one half of it. There's so much about life we don't understand. Black Eyes uses energy of an unknown intensity, and the result maintains Black Eyes' life. Nov, although that is the case, your animal did not live a comfortable life in the Venusian swamp. Because no animal would attack it, it could not be harmed. Still, from what you tell me about that swamp... i '"Anyhow. Black Eyes was glad to come away with you, and everything went well until you landed in New York. The noises, the clattering, the continual bustle of a great city -- all this frightened the creature. It was being attacked -- or, at least that's what it must have figured. Result: it struck back the only way it knew how. Have you ever heard about sub-sonic soundwaves, Mr. Whitney, waves of sound so low that our ears cannot pick them up -- waves of sound which can nevertheless stir our emotions? Such things exist, and, as a working hypothesis, I would say Black Eyes' strange powers rest along those lines. The whole city is idle because Black Eyes is afraid!" In his exploration of Mars, of Venus, of the Jovian Moons -- Judd Whitney had seen enough of extraterrestrial life to know that virtually anything was possible, and Black Eyes would be no exception to that rule. "What do you propose to do?" Judd demanded. "Do? Why, we'll have to kill your creature, naturallv. You can set a   value on it and we will meet it, but Black Eyes must die." "No!" Lindy cried. "You can't be sure, you're only guessing, and it isn't fair!" "My dear woman, don't you realize this is a serious situation? The city's people will starve in time, No one can even bring food in because the trucks make too much noise! As an alternative, we could evacuate, but is your pet more valuable than the life of a great city?" itJsJ #  In no... "Then, please! Listen to reason!" "Kill it," Judd said. "Go ahead." Dr. Jamison withdrew from his pocket a small blasting pistol used by the Department of Domestic Animals for elimination of injured creatures. He advanced on Black Eyes, who sat on its haunches in the center of the room, surveying the scientist. ' :  : Dr. Jamison put his blaster away. "I can't' he said. "I don't want to." Judd smiled. "I know it. No one -- no thing -- can kill Black Eyes. You said so yourself. It was a waste of time to try it. In that case -- --" "In that case' Dr. Jamison finished for him, "we're helpless. There isn't a man -- or an animalon Earth that will destroy this I thing. Wait a minute -- does it sleep, Mr. Whitney?" "I don't think so. At least, I never saw it sleep. And your team of scientists, did they report anything?" "No. As far as they could see, the creature never slept. We can't catch it unawares." "Could you anesthetize it?" "How? It can sense danger, and long before you could do that, it would stop you. It's only made one mistake, Mr. Whitney: it believes the noises of the city represent a danger. And that's only a negative mistake. Noise won't hurt Black Eyes, of course. It simply makes the animal unnecessarily cautious. But we cannot anesthetize it any more than we can kill it;" "I could take it back to Venus." "Could you? Could you? I hadnH thought of that." Judd shook his head. "I can't." "What do you mean you can't?" "It won't let me. Somehow it can sense our thoughts when we think something it doesn't want. I can't take it to Venus! No man could, because it doesn't want to go." "My dear Mr. Whitney -- do you mean to say you believe it can think r "Uh-uh. Didn't say that. It can sense our thoughts, and that's something else again." Dr. Jamison threw his hands up over his head in a dramatic gesture. "It's hopeless." he said. York crawled along to a standstill People began to move from the city. In trickles, at first, but the trickles became torrents, as New depart for saner places. It might take months -- it" might even take years, but the exodus had begun. Nothing could stop it. Because of a harmless little beast with the eyes of a tarsier. the life of a great city was coming to an end. Word spread. Scientists all over the world studied reports on Black Eyes. No one had any ideas. Everyone was stumped. Black Eyes had no particular desire to go outside. Black Eyes merely remained in the Whitney house, contemplating nothing in particular, and stopping everything. Dr. Jamison, however, was a persistent man. Judd got a letter from him one day, and the following afternoon he kept his appointment with the scientist "It's good to get out," Judd said, after a three hour walk to the Department of Science Building. "I can go crazy just staring at that thing." i "I have it, Whitney." "You have what? Not the way to destroy Black Eyes? I don't believe it!" "It's true. Consider. Everyone in the world does not yet know' of your pet, correct?"  . "I suppose there are a few people who don't -- "  "There are many. Among them, are the crew of a jet-bomber which has been on maneuvers in Egypt. We have arranged everything." "Yes? How?" ' "At noon tomorrow, the bomber will appear over your home with  fa explosive will nity, and, preee in the afterdestroyed with it. e. "I too easy." asy? I doubt if the animal will ever sense what is going oncrew of the bomber nowj either. They'll coner it a mighty peculiar order, to estroy one harmless, rather large and rather elaborate suburban home. But they'll do it. See you tomorrow, Whitney, after this mess is behind us." "Yeah" Judd said. "Yeah." But somehow, the scientist had failed to instill any of his confidence in Judd. If eleven the following morning, after making a thorough list of all their properties which the City had promised to duplicate. Judd did look at Black Eyes as he left, the animal remained where it on its haunches under room table, nibbling almost feel the a pair of twin he dared not face them... away at their way "I know." "Do you "I -- IJudd knew to be done with didn't like the little way, that had nothin Black Eyes was a ered in Don't let them , don't It wasn't Judd and it wasn subconscious. It was and he knew it. But he con a thing about it -- "I'm going to stay right here an let them bomb the place," he said aloud. But as he spoke, he was running back the way he had come. Fifteen minutes. s He sprinted part of the time, then rested, then sprinted again. He was somewhat on the beefy side and he could not run fast, but he made it. Just. He heard the jet streaking through the sky overhead, looked up once and saw it circling. Two blocks from his house he was met by a policeman. The entire area had been roped off, and the officer shook his head when Judd trie  get through. "But I live there!" a Can't help it, Judd hit him. Ju to, but neverthe' wi blow to be a sr e looked wards. Then him , m der the rope the animal Then he was runbefore he reached i...a.'V explosions ripped rain, and instinctively yes' instincts, not his -- he arms over the animal, C   e doesn t All right; far from out in the sticks matter much stop to any "Who will take  and began to fall behind him, and said scattered in all directions, struck Judd's head and he felt the ground slapping up crazily at .his face -- "He was I as good as new a few days later. And so was Black Eyes. I have it," Judd said to his nurse. "You. have what, sir?" "It's so simple, so ridiculously simple, maybe that's why no one ever thought of it. Get me Dr. Jamison!" Jamison came a few moments later, breathless.' "Well?" "I have the solution" "You... do?" Not much hope # answer. Dr. Jamison was a defeated man. lack Eyes doesn't like the Take him out. I can't Venus. He doesn't like he won't go. No one i him anyplace he doesn't as no one can hurt Judd shook his your job, not mine, the answer. Now use it. Lindy had arrived, "Judd, you're ri the answer. And you're wonderful -- " No one volunteered to spend his life in exile with Black Eyes, but then Dr. Jamison pointed out that while no one knew the creature's life-span, it certainly couldn't be expected to match man's. Just a few years and the beast would die, and... Dr. Jamison's arguments were so logical that he convinced himself. He took Black Eyes with him into the Canadian North woods, and there they live. This was the obvious which escaped everyone. But scientists continue examinations of Black they discovered someth! Eyes fears had not alone. She is goin The estimate is tarsier-eyed creatures the world wi butW : r j. never foresaw the complications his selective antigravitational field would cause. Knowing the grand old man as I did, I can. say that he never intended his "blessing" should be-' come the curse to mankind that it did. And the catastrophe it brought about was certainly beyond range of all prophecy. Of course, anyone who lived in and tried to get inside StegTier's weird lifecircle must agree can get too much of a mod thing. Even a pumpkin can and that's what hap s Prof turned on his : and too :ot day Stegner an- of ten year's  research on his selector. Nearly everyone present had read the sensational articles concerning his work in the feature sections of the big town newspapers. Like the rest, I had a vague idea of what it was about. It seemed the Prof had developed a device that repelled various particles of matter without effecting others. In short, if he turned on his gadget, gravity reversed itself for certain elements, and they went away in a hurry. Like this: he could take oxide of iron, turn on his selective repe and the rust rather mai to pure iron cimty. All of whic f patent rights to certain fre poisons con ins in the heretofore harmless foods over most known ni ng, costingfar less Anyway, when the press, myself was really excited. # # the standard and said, H I have solved y gave the old man his opout a big relab in California, not far from civilization, but secluded enough for secrecy. Then he set about to try his selective repellor on living tissues. His suspicion, that wonderful things could be discovered if he tuned his anti "gravitational field to the undesirable elements in the body, was confirmed. Like lead poisoning -- something no doctor cancure if it is severe. He found that he could cure a case of lead poisoning merely by making the lead go away from there via the field. More wonderful things began to come out of the Stegner laboratory, and he made a lot more iry.  Which was all very well indeed, couldn't leave well enough alone -- he had to delve and Ms own theories about its cause, old age, and nuttier than a fruit cake. of a crank on bods and diets that with chemical organic garno was ever isoi    puzzle of all time me, no medical man cause of old age. I what the deterioration factor and I have provided a reme sure and immediate remedy! The golden age of mankind is here ! Our life span can be greatly extended!" I looked at Jake Heinz, my cameraman. Jake winked at me, but i didn't respond. I liked the Prof. Such a fine old gentleman, to go whacky from so much success Jake took a few shots of the Profs rabbits and guinea pigs, of the Prof himself, and of the apparatus he had constructed which he claimed drove out the causative poison of age; a poison he called a radioactive isotope of Potassium The other reporters, not bavin soft hearts Jake and I toted aroun wrote him up as a joke; sal out they thought the blowing his top. Immortality They presented the a farce. No reporters were wrong than those s Profs little over and y started. What kind of things? Well, up to that line, things were normal ; but beyond it, grass got enormous, the ground was higher and softer. Trees forgot to shed their leaves. Animals flocked there to eat the lush grass, so the Prof erected a ten-foot electrified fence around his land to keep out the hordes of rabbits, deer, mice and what have you that came to feast off the new supply of better forage. That was only the beginning. Some months later there came items about houseflies the size of walnuts hatching out around the Profs retreat. Now a swarm of houseflies the size of walnuts is news, and Jake and I got up there on the jump. It was terrific! The flies were there all right, but so were a good many other oversized creatures. Roosting in the trees were robins, bluebirds, and doves as large as turkeys. King-sized ducks waddled about importantly, displaying pouter-pigeon crops from overeating. It was as if some god had drawn a line and said : "This is the new Eden, where all living tilings will prosper terrifically." You never saw a sight like it! Or did you? Were you one of the horde who started camping around the Profs magic circle trying to get permission to enter? It was then we got proof that it pays to be kind. Of all the newsgrabbers who surrounded the Profs big wire gate, Jake and I were the only ones who got in. The old man had not forgotten who had taken him seriously and who had made fun of him. Jake snapped a series of startling pics of the oversized animals and birds. I interviewed the Prof again, even got his maid, Tilda's opinions, and wrote it up as unsensationally as possible, playing down the tremendous potential for trouble, placing up the really effective method the old scientist had discovered for "eliminating the deterioration factor" in life. I could see where the world was in for some changes, and the going was going to be rough enough for the old man without making it worse. But my efforts came to naught when the pics Jake had taken reached the editor's desk. He hit the ceiling, called me on the carpet, wanted to know where my news sense had gotten lost. Then he sent out three other smart boys to do a good job on it. The paper got out a special edition -- and the troubles I had foreseen began. First, the government stepped in, trying to hush-hush the whole thing; but too late. The rush had started. For miles around the poor Prof's fenced-in hideaway, cars and trailers parked in a mad sensejess jumble. People crowded against the fences and the electricity had to be shut off. Some smart aleck produced wire cutters and made an opening. The invasion of the new Eden had begun. Stegner took flight, taking his secret apparatus and files with him. He declined police escort, and vanished from his mad Eden. Where he went was impossible to learn, but I supposed the government knew. The area he had revitalized with nine davs tile birds. Ap the end of the had triumphed with its usual stupid us remembered, could out. of our minds the significance of what the old man had had pointed the way to a lush immortality, and he had been shoved aside and pawed over and written about like some fredc. If .he had been a notorious criminal, he would have gotten far better journalistic treatment. But the years went by -- four, five of them. And nothing more was heard of Stegner and his work. Until, one day coming home from a night shifttbn the paper, I found a letter in my box. It was a rather plain looking envelope, but much sr than the ordinary. The handwritten address was quite Icgl!e, but very big, as if a giant hand itself to produce ordinary script :  far gotten tne, you. If you would r a time , insert a F in the ect . I am trusting  a noncommi me x. me to boarded a plane I used to know asHarry and took a   is i pilot   erly bearing. I looked saw we were over water. We came, down somewhere South America and I got the plane as mystified as Yd entered it. even discuss the weather! I had expected another Eden, hidden away from the world. But the land of brobdignags I found staggered me. Grasses, trying to be trees, and trees . There were no words for the bigness, the health and vitality of Steg ner and the government who hd welcomed him here in South America. But Stegner hustled me aside before I had time to  do more than goggle at the mainmoth layout of this new Eden under government  supervision. He took rne to his house, a huge thing built with huge hands, big enou to accommodate a  man tall! Yes, Stegner was a in thatfantastic away was a giant.  overlooked a great tegner pointed one the horizon :i. ' was an endless same, as in California so. The natives  saw beyond a i     at... mem were electric Through a pair me, I dead were I gasped. 's voice held the sadness real and sorrowful god. T am ip, my friend. I have preto acquiesce, but. my cohorts are not fully deluded as to my loyalty to the thing they plan. These government men had gone mad with power. And the problem that now faces me seems insurmountable, The peoples of this world are too small, morally, for so big a life. I fear chaos. I thought that perhaps you, with your native shrewdness, might help me unlock this prison I am in, reconcile this Eden and its growth to the world that it must' eventually overrun. It will overrun the planet, but I would prefer it not to be by violence as these mad men plan it. They have taken my gift to mankind for their own agrandizement." thought I had the answer that one! "Hell, you saw that from wondered when would come. I'm a I know what oes t isn't ready for as you can give it -- too ness. This tiling has so ways it can o?" ms Us Homs" to a "ft. even one, so that the chips of the table. be a -- such as existe and the U. S, "You mean . "I mean let me of here in a hurry, wit of your processes, them all over the wor can lick this thing. Your was in buildin fence, and somebody'! "You are a wise friend," he said. "Then I'm making a run for it right now. They won't expect me to be dashing off before Fve even taken off my hat. Give me "your formulae, and show me the back door." man, my n "You can only leave by plane . "Okay. I can fly one:' I had my own crate for several years until the finance company took it away from me. The airfield's right next to the house... He gave me the papers. "What's in 'em?" I asked. "The formulae for the creation the repellent an U gravitational which eliminates the age-fa ment. I have been w growth inhibitor, but I have had little time it. Briefly, it is a met the field even more se ing in the body which have cause c   growing at is not natura am sure that i e my w ment, man eat it too. He rv a ism as we are doing, yet his life and health will he prolonged." "Why not just explain it to these men?" He laughed bitterly. "They wish to use their gigantic size to conquer the world. They can do it, too. Their minds have increased in power. Growth is that way. But moral values are something different -- they are acquired by experience. Find some moral men who might use this information to circumvent what is about to happen." I took the papers and shook his gigantic hand. I left via the back door, and sneaked through a clump of giant ferns to the edge of the airfield. A little prowling revealed a parked plane, long unused because those who had flown it here had grown too big to use it. I waited, hidden in the lush greenery until the setting sun would hide my movements. It would only be a few minutes now... The hangar in which the plane was parked contained several gasoline drums, the kind with pumps on them that worked with a crank. I got into the hangar, finally, and before it got too dark to see, checked the plane's gas gauge. It was about a quarter full. I connected the gas hose and started pumping. In twenty minutes I had her full, then I climbed into the plane... When the motor caught, after I was sure it never would, the thunder of the prop brought giants running toward me from the far end of the field, their twenty-foot strides eating up the distance. But I taxied straight toward them, giving the plane's motors all they would take. The plane roared down the field, and they fell flat as the prop came at them. The plane lifted, spun over them, was off. Now slugs from oversize rifles came buzzing about me, crashing through the fuselage. But it was dark and I was away. No serious damage had been done. In Texas it took me four hours to get the brass to listen to me. Finally they did. They didn't ask me to keep my mouth shut. They just turned me loose. I went to my editor and told him the truth. He didn't believe me. When he checked with the army, they said I was obviously trying to perpetrate a hoax. I nearly got fired. waited. I knew I'd have to wait until my chance came. There' d have to be hellfire before anybody'd believe my story. Then the storm broke, in sensational headlines. "Gigantic beasts wipe out town in South America." My editor sent for me. He showed me the headline. "Maybe I made a mistake not believing your story about Stegner," he said. "I make a lot of mistakes." "You want me to cover this?" I said. v "That's it. And if you can come up with proof of what you toldme when you got back from that crazy trip, I'll print every damned word." I knew they were at last taking it seriously. The locals had called out the army to fight the strange monsters that were coming out of the jungle. They were such things as army ants six feet long; anteaters looking like ambling locomotives with hairy hides and noses; lumbering sloths vast as a houses on legs, sleepy and comic as ever, but terrifyingly destructive; jaguars like trucks and trailers; centipedes with stingers over their backs that would reach a man in a third-story' window; wasps and bees like buzzards. The army was lashing at. these things with machine guns, flame throwers, tanks and rockets. Jeeps careened across the landscape with loads of ammo. It was a madhouse on a vast scale, and being fought to the death. They waited for the beasts to come out of the jungle, then they jumped them -- or were jumped. Nobody was allowed to fly into the hinterland to see where they were coming from. And when I tried to get officials to consider it, they absolutely refused. Up there, it was hinted, were secret government projects -- besides they were too far away -- and radio said there was no sign of anything unusual there. It was worth even a general's job to poke his nose in near those projects. And how could I tell these people traitorous men of their own government were the culprits? It just wasn't possible -- and because I had to stay on the scene, I never even hinted it. I merely waited my chance to produce proof. I knew I'd get it, sooner or later. Something would come out of that jungle I'd be able to use to convey the real menace to the knowledge of a puzzled world. I wrote carefully, reporting the weird war with the animal world -- and I kept inserting paragraphs hinting about Stcgner and his growth field, adding "rumors" that maybe his work had been taken over by a power-mad clique and it was they who were loosing this horror. My  boss liked the stuff I was putting in, because it sold papers, and I was careful to keep my facts separate, and label my theories. Nobody -- at least so it seemed -- believed the theories, but they made good reading. I got a raise in salary. Other reporters were knocking out stories as good as mine, but without the insight into the facts that I had. So their stories went too far afield. Mine became popular, and were in demand as reprints all over the world. But officially, nobody paid any attention to me, so the important papers nestled the bottom of my trunk. I didn't want them confiscated until the time came when I could publish them with proof. My boss would back me up when that proof came. I was sure of that. I got my chance the day the giantess came crashing out of the smoke and dust of the circle of horror across which the beasts were constantly lunging. She was near naked, and half mad with pain from the giant insects plaquing her. No one fired on her as she stood with uplifted arms, waiting for the soldiers to kill her as she expected. Beautiful as a goddess out of an ancient myth she came forward toward the soldiers, her face lighting with hope, her hair streaming golden in the sun. She spoke to us then, and the silence that came over the field of carnage was com"Look at me! Look at me and believe! There are others like me, back in the jungle; mad giants who plan to conquer your world. They are ready to do it. I have escaped to warn you. They are mad, these giants my master has created. They are monsters..." I recognized her now. My senses leaped and my blood pounded in my veins. Here was my opportunity to convince the world. This was Tilda, Stegner s maid! I snapped several pictures of her as she went on talking. "These men, who were once your own leaders are plotting to destroy you and take the world for themselves. You do not know what they are preparing for you, but I come to tell you. Make ready, for they arc on their way to destroy you. They bring huge guns, monster tanks that they have built, machines never before seen on earth." What more she might have told we were never to know, for she fell then, at the end of her strength. Whatever she had dared, whatever she had gone through to break out of that monstrous circle and come to us, had been too much even for her giant's strength. She fell, like a tower crashing down, and lay there, a great lax pile of pink and red flesh, torn by thorns, the claws of animals, the stingers of terrible giant insects. Then the monsters came again, and we could not go to her. She lay there as darkness came, and in the morning only her skeleton remained. stripped of flesh in the night by the myriad devouring giant ants and beetles. V photos of Tilda. My editor printed the whole story, printed my formulae, printed every word of the history of Stegner and his creations, and the secret menace he had unwittingly loosed on the world from his second hidden Eden in the jungle. I was called home. They came to me then, those moral ones Stegner had said existed. Men high in government and army circles who had the peace and welfare of the world at heart. Selfless ones whose records were above reproach. And they proved to be high in the powers of the world, able to command. to my reporting. I wanted to be on hand when the attack of which Tilda had warned became reality... I was some twelve miles from the deadly circle when the giant tanks appeared. They were larger than any moving thing ever seen on Earth before. Tracklayers, caterpillars -- and swinging above them slender towers which bore ominous gleaming nozzles. On they came. Then they struck at us. From the unnameable, that swept forward like a slow lightning, a kind of crackling sheet of cold fire that spread from tower to tower, in an arc that began to bend toward our lines. The fire came in mile-wide swaths. There was no outcry, no terror -- just the sweating lines of men in foxholes, the crews about the guns, heaving ammo into their maws; the rumbling trucks and the careening jeeps. The fire swept over all like liquid radiance, like a pouring out of moonlight, soft but was gone. And when it had gone, nothing but silence remained. Dead men stretched out where they  had lain waiting, fallen where they labored ; jeeps careened on to crash into, stumps or bigger trucks -- and stop forever, Only silence and death and nothingness was left. When the silence swept across the whole front I dropped my glasses and lit out for my own car, and headed for the coast. I wanted to file this story in person, and I knew, too, that army would not be there in the morning. I meant to stay alive. I knew that the hope for mankind lay in what honest men were doing with Stegner's formulae. I had to know. So I fled. Next day they were dropping atom bombs on every moving thing in Stegncr's ghastly Eden. High flying bombers flew in swarms -- and many of them were being shot down by the weird fire. I saw those atom bombs falling, on television, and the white radiance reaching up toward them. I saw' it catch them in its embrace, saw them explode harmlessly in the air, midway in in their plunge. Whatever the fire was, it was a defense against the atom bomb, for it exploded them before they could reach their targets.  It didn't catch them all, and it didn't intercept all the high-flying bombers loosing their guided rocket missiles. It got enough though, to show us we were on the losing end. What we needed was a miracle. And the miracle did occur... At first, even with my fingers on every tag end of information that came out of the terrible area, it was an unnoticeable change. Then I got it. The men doing our fighting changed in caliber and ability. I never learned, due to the official habit of hushing everything up, just whose technology accomplished the miracle, but it must have been started from the first, with those army officers who had listened to me with such lack of interest when I spoke before their inquisition at the Texas army air field. All I learned was that there was a new kind of man busy at the front, a man of keener intellect, swifter of action, infinitely more able than the former ordinary soldier. It was Jake who first confirmed my suspicions. He brought in photographs of men lifting trucks out of mudholes, men tearing steel cables apart with their bare hands, men jumping over twenty-foot barriers with full pack. "Whatta I do with that kind of pic? The people are so fed up with the impossible news they are getting that they don't believe anything any more! But you and I know a news camera doesn't lie... it doesn't have' time!" They had put the Profs formulae to work against the giants. This time it was the right formulae. They had growth without increase in size, a growth of ability, of strength, of mentality, without any increase in ponderous structure. These new soldiers were the policemen of the United Nations made into supermen! I began to believe in the human race again. "Great!" I said. "This iswhat I've been waiting for!" Jake tossed me his pictures and went away. I turned to the typewriter and began batting out my story: "Mankind solves the problem of giantism! The new weapon against the giants is -- the new man!" Those little giants waded into that circle through all the deadly fire and the giant scorpions and vast beasts like Jack-the-GiantKiller's multitudinous sons -- and it wasn't a month later that I typed the last story of my life and gave up reporting for good. It was the tale of the death of the last giant -- and Jake's picture of him, armed in the end with only his fists, huge as a tree, mad with hunger and thirst and terrible fear of the little men who were just as mighty, a lot quicker, and every bit as smart as any giant. They routed him out with tear gas and shot him down with plain old GI rifle fire. Yes, I gave up newspaper work. Why? They offered me a job making a movie out of the "War of the Giants". The job gave me quick money, which is what I needed.  The wife and I are starting a new colony on Malino Island. It's in the Carelinas. We're going to try this growth-without-size business out properly. Yes, that' s my son. Eight months. He doesn't ordinarily go around dragging a piano -- it just got in his way.  underestimate... Lefferts  madness could drive all women back into slavery -- it could even cost Lucinda a mink coat! course  # said Lucinda, passing the marmalade, "but the brass was beautifully polished. The whole thing made me quite angry, though at the same time I was delighted." Meticulously Dr. Lefferts closed the newly-arrived Journal of the Micro-biological Institute y placed it cm the copy of Strength of Materials in Various Radioisotopic Alloys which lay beside his plate, and carefully removed his pincenez. "You begin in mid-sequence," he said, picking up a butter-knife. "Your thought is  predicate without a stated subject. Finally, your description of your reactions contains parts which appear mutually exclusive." He attacked the marmalade. "Will you elucidate?" Lucinda laughed good-humoredly. "Of course, darling. Where would you like me to begin?" "Oh... Dr. Lefferts made a vague gesture. "Practically anywhere. Anywhere at all. Simply supply more relative data in order that I may extrapolate the entire episode and thereby dispose of it. Otherwise I shall certainly keep returning to it all day long. Lucinda, why do you continually do this me?" "Do what, dear?" "Present me with colorful trivialities in just such amounts as will make me demand to hear you I have a trained mind, Lucinda ; a fine-honed, logical rmind. It must think things through. You know inually do  the beginning fa to the end. certainly... eh. Per" He laid maran English muffin aids, and began together at right les to their original lay. "You are right, my dear. That must be  difficult for you from time to time... yes "No indeed," said Lucinda, and smiled. "Not as long as I can get your full attention when I want it. And I can." Dr. Lefferts chewed her statement with his muffin. At last he said, "I admit that in your in -- ufa -- I think" one calls it female way, you can. At least in regard to small issues. Now do me the kindness to explain to me what stimuli could cause you to -- " His voice supplied the punctuationquite angry # and 'delighted' simultaneously." Lucinda leaned forward to pour fee into his cooling cup. an ample woman, with an combination of S' e i relaxation. Her voice ilfows and her eyes #. "It was on the  said. "I was waitis girl drove right under the It was like zine illustration bright-yellow lazing blonde ling, I do this year's the most baffiin way, there she was the car was the trafficc faced and Hibernian type-casting as you came blustering over manding to know begorry he actually did say begorry she color-blind, now, or perhaps not give a care ItliA this marmn a In albinos," said Dr. Lefferts, ic color perception is -- " voice just sufficiently to override him without a break in continuity. "Now, here was an arrant violation of the law, flagrantly committed under the eyes of an enforcement officer. I don't have to tell you what should have happened. What did happen was that the girl kept her head turned away from him until his hands were on the car door. In the sun that of hers was When he was close, enough range, that is -- she tossed back and was face to face You could see that bog-peat turn to said to him (and if sical notebook wit have jotted sharps and flats) officer, I did it oi could see you  Dr. Lefferts  .if #; "He did not," said Lucinda. "He shook a big thick forefinger at her as if she were a naughty but beloved child, and the push-button blarney that oozed out of him was as easy to see as the wink he gave her. That's what made me mad." "And well it should." He folded his napkin. "Violations of the law should be immediately pun -- " "The law had little to do with it" Lucinda said warmly. "I was angry because I know what would have happened to you or to me in that same situation. We'rejust not equipped." "I begin to see." He put his pince-nez back on and peered at her. "And what was it that delighted you?" She stretched easily and halfclosed her eyes. "The -- what you have called the femaleness of it. It's good to be a woman, darling, and to watch another woman be female skillfully." "I quarrel with your use of the term 'skillfully,' " he said, folding his napkin. "Her 'skill' is analogous to an odor of musk or other such exudation in the lower animals." "It is not she said flatly. "With the lower animals, bait of that kind means one thing and one thing only, complete and final. With a woman, it means nothingof the kind. Never mind what it might mean; consider what it does mean. Do you think for a moment that the blonde in the convertible was making herself available to the policeman?" "She was hypothesizing a situation in which -- #  "She was hypothesizing nothing of the kind. She was blatantly and brazenly getting out of paying a traffic fine, and that was absolutely all. And you can carry it one step further; do you think that for one split second the policeman actually believed that she was inviting him? Of course he didn't! And yet that situation is one that has obtained through the ages. Women have always been able to get what they wanted from men by pretending to promise a thing which they know r men want but will not or cannot take. Mind you. I'm not talking about situations where this yielding is the main issue. I'm talking about the infinitely greater number of occasions where yielding has nothing to do with it. Like w'easeling out of traffic tickets." "Or skillfully gaining your husband's reluctant attention over the breakfast table." Her sudden laughter was like a shower of sparks. "You'd better get down to the Institute," she said. "You'll be late." He arose, picked up his book and pamphlet, and walked slowly to the door. Lucinda came with him, hooking her arm through his. Suddenly he stopped, and without looking at her, asked quietly, "That policeman was a manipulated, undignified fool, wasn't he?" "Of course he was, darling, and it made a man of him." He nodded as if accepting a statistic, and, kissing her, walked out I of the house. Darling , she thought, dear sweet chrome-plated , fine-drawn , highpolished blue-print... I think Fve found where you keep your vanity She watched him walk with his even, efficient, unhurried stride to the gate. There he paused and looked back. "This has been going an too long he called. "I shall alter it." Lucinda stopped smiling. AY I come in?" "Jenny, of course." Lucinda went to the kitchen door and unhooked it. "Come in, come in. My, you're prettier than ever this morning." "I brought you violets," said Jenny breathlessly. "Just scads of 'em in the woods behind my place. You took your red curtains down. Is that a new apron? My! you had Canadian bacon for breakfast." She darted in past Lucinda, a small, wiry, vibrant girl with sunlit hair and moonlit eyes. "Can I help with the dishes?" "Thank you, you doll." Lucinda took down a shallow glass bowl for the violets. Jenny busily ran hot water into the sink. "I couldn't help seeing," she said. "Your big picture window... Lucinda, you never leave the breakfast dishes. I keep telling Bob, some day I'll have the routines you have, everything always so neat, never running out of anything, never in a hurry, never surprised... anyway, all the way over I could see you just sitting by the table there, and the dishes not done and all... is everything all right? I mean, don't tell me if I shouldn't ask, but I couldn't help... Her voice trailed off into an ardent and respectful mumble. "You're such a sweetheart," Lucinda said mistily. She came over to the sink carrying clean dishtowels and stood holding them, staring out past Jenny's head to the level lawns of the village. "Actually, I did have something on my mind... something . , She related the whole conversation over breakfast that morning, from her abrupt and partial mentioning of the anecdote about the blonde and the policeman, to her husband's extraordinary andunequivocal statement about women's power over men: This has bee?i go ing on too long. I shall alter it. "Is that all?" Jenny asked when she had finished. "Mm. It's all that was said." "Oh, I don't think you should worry about that." She crinkled up her eyes, and Lucinda understood that she was putting herself and her young husband in the place of Lucinda and Dr. Lefferts, and trying to empathize a solution. "I think you might have hurt his feelings a little, maybe," Jenny said at length. "I mean, you admitted that you handled him in much the same way as that blonde handled the policeman, and then you said the policeman was a fool" Lucinda smiled. "Very shrewd. And what's your guess about that parting shot?" Jenny turned to face her. "You're not teasing me, asking my opinion, Lucinda? I never thought I'd see the day l Not you -- you're so wise!" Lucinda patted her shoulder. "The older I get, the more I feel that among women there is a lowest common denominator of wisdom, and that the chief difference between them is a random scattering of blind spots. No, honey, I'm not teasing you. You may be able to see just where I can't. Now tell me: what do you think he meant by that?' # " e I shall alter it', Jenny quoted thoughtfully. "Oh, I don't think he meant anything much. You showed him how you could make him do things, and he didn't like it. He's decided not to let you do it any more, but -- but... "But what?" "Well, it's tike with Bob. When he gets masterful and lays down the law I just agree with him. He forgets about it soon enough. If you agree with men all the time they cant get stubborn about anything."Lucinda laughed aloud. "There's the wisdom!" she cried. Sobering, site shook her head. "You don't know the doctor the way I do. He's a great man -- a truly great one, with a great mind. It' great in a way no other mind has ever been. H#V- different. Jenny, I know how people talk, and what a lot of them say. People wonder why I married him, why I've stayed with him all these years. They say he's stuffy and didactic and that he has no sense of humor, Weil, to them he may be ; but to me hfc is a continual challenge. The rules-ofthumb that keep most men in line don't apply to him. "And if he says he can do something, he can. If he says he will do something, he will." Jenny dried her hands and sat down slowly. "He meant," she said positively, "that he would alter your ability to make him do things. Because die only other thing he could have meant was that he was going to alter the thing that makes it possible for any woman to handle any man. And that just couldn't be. How could he change human nature?" "How? How? He's the scientist. I'm not. I simply eliminate that 'how' from my thinking. The worrisome thing about it is that he doesn't think in small ways about small issues. I'm afraid that's just what he meant -- that he was going to change some factor in humanity that is responsible for this power we have over men." "Oh... really." said Jenny. She looked up at Lucinda, moved her hands uneasily. "Lucinda, I know how great the doctor is, and how much you think of him, but -- but no one man could do such a thing! Not ouside of his own home." She grinned fleetingiy. "Probably not inside of it, for very long... I never understood just what sort of a scientist he is. Can you tell me, I mean, aside from any secret projects he might be on? Like Bob, now; Bob's a hightemperature metallurgist. What is the doctor, exactly?" "That's the right question to ask," Lucinda said, and her voice was shadowed. "Dr. Lefferts is a -- well, the closest you could get to it would be to call him a specializing non-specialist. You see, science has reached the point where each branch of it continually branches into specialties, and each specialty has its own crop of experts. Most experts live in the confines of their own work. The doctor was saving just the other day that he'd discovered a fluorine-boron step-reaction in mineralogy that had been known for so long that the mineralogists had forgotten about it -- yet it was unknown to metallurgy. Just as I said a moment ago, his mind is great, and -- different. His job is to draw together the chemists and the biologists, the pure mathematicians and the practical physicists, the clinical psychologists and the engineers and all the otherists andologies. His specialty is scientific thought as applied to all the sciences. He has no assignments except to survey all the fields and transfer needed information from one to the other. There has never been such a position in the Institute before, nor a man to fill it. And there is no other institute like this one on earth. "He has entree into every shop and lab and library in this Institute, He can do anything or get anything done in any of them. "And when he said T shall alter that he meant what he said!" #I T never knew that's what he did, # breathed Jenny. "I never knew that's what... who he is. # "That's who he is." "But what can he change Jenny burst out. "What can he change in us, in all men, in all women? What is the power he's talking about, and where does it come from, and what wou will... happen if it's changed?" "I don't know," Lucinda said thought! ully, # # I -- do- -- not -- know. f # fof nrir!p in tbs rrtnwrf i'KIa that sort of thing is just one of the things a woman naturally does, because she Is a woman, without thinking of it." Unexpectedly, Jenny giggled. "You don't plan those things. You just do them. It's nice when it works. A better roast from the butcher. A reminder from one of the men at the bank that a check's overdrawn, in time to cover it." "I know, # ' smiled Lucinda, "I know'. It's easy and inaccurate to say that all those men are on the prowl -- or all those women either. A few are, but most are not. The women has survived even equal opportunity and equal pay for women. The ability of women to get what they want from men lies completely in their knowledge of that band wants to alter -- will alter -- lies in that department. "Lucinda, why don't you just ask him?" "I shall. But I don't know if I'll get an answer. If he regards it as a security matter, nothing will get it out of him." # # You I #I tell me, won't you?" "Jenny, my sweet, if he tells me nothing, I can't tell you. If he tells me and asks me to keep his confidence, I won't tell you. If he tells me and puts no restrictions on it. I'll tell you everything." "But -- "  "I know, dear. You're thinking that it's a bigger thing than just what it might mean to the two of us. Well, you're right. But deep I'm confidents I'd pit women again?    pect them to win out. But anytime all womankind is against all mankind, the men don't stand a chance. Think hard about it, anyway. At least we should be able to figure out where the attack is coming from." "At least you admit it's an attack" #  "You bet your sweet life it's an attack. There's been a woman behind most thrones all through history. The few times that hasn't been true, it's taken a woman to clean up the mess afterward. We won't give up easily, darling!" blow', and we shall have snow', and so on " said Lucinda as she lit the fire. "I'm going to need a new coat." "Very well," said Dr. LefTerts. "A fur coat this time." "Fur coats," pronounced the doctor, "are impractical. Get one with the fur inside. You'll keep warmer with less to carry'." "I want a fur coat with the fur outside, where it shows." "I understand and at times admire the decorative compulsions," said the doctor, rising from the adjusted cube he used for an easy chair, "but not when they are unhealthy, uneconomical, and inefficient. My dear, vanity does not become you." "A thing that has always fascinated me " said Lucinda in a dangerously quiet voice, "in rabbits, weasels, skunks, pumas, pandas, and mink, and all other known mammals and marsupials, is their huge vanity. They all wear their fur outside." He put on his pince-nez to stare at her. "Your logic limits its factors. I find such sequences remarkable because of the end results one may obtain. However, I shall not follow this one." "If you're so preoccupied with efficiency and function," she snapped, "why do you insist on wearing those pince-nez instead of getting corneal lenses?" "Functional living is a pattern which includes all predictable phenomena," he said reasonably. "One of these is habit. I recognize that I shall continue to like pincenez as much as I shall continue to dislike rice pudding. My functionalism therefore includes these glasses and excludes that particular comestible. If you had the fur-coat habit, the possibility of a fur coat would be calculable. Since you have never had such a coat, we' can consider the matter disposed of." "I think some factors were selected for that sequence," said Lucinda between her teeth, "but I can't seem to put my finger on the missing ones." "I beg your pardon?" "I said," appended Lucinda distinctly, "that speaking of factors, I wonder how you're coming with your adjustment of human nature to eliminate the deadliness of the female." "Oh, that. I expect results momentarily." "Why bother?" she said bitterly. "My powers don't seem to be good enough for a fur coat as it is." "Oh," he said mildly, "wereyou using them? # ' Because she was Lucinda, she laughed. "No, darling, I wasn't;' She went to him and pressed him hack into the big cubical chair and sat on the arm. "I was demanding, cynical, and unpleasant. These things in a woman represent the scorched earth retreat, rather than the looting advance." "An excellent analogy' he said. "Excellent. It has been a long and bitter war, hasn't it? And now it's coming to an end. It is an extraordinary thing that in our difficult progress toward the elimination of wars, we have until now ignored the greatest and most pernicious conflict of all -- the one between the sexes." "Why so pernicious?" she chuckled. "There are times when it's rather fun." He said solemnly, "There are moments of exhilaration, even of glory, in every great conflict. Rut such conflicts tear down so much more than they build." "What's been so damaging about the war between the spxes?" "Though it has been the women who made men, it has been largely men who have made the world as we know it. However, they have had to do so against a truly terrible obstacle: . the emotional climate created by women. Only by becoming an ascetic can a man avoid the oscillations between intoxication and distrust instilled into him by women. And ascetics usually are already insane or rapidly become so." "I think you're overstating a natural state of affairs." # T am overstating # he admitted, "for clarity's sake, and off the record. However, this great war is by no means natural On the contrary, it is a most unnatural state of affairs. You see, homo sapieris is, in one small but important respect, an atypical mammal" "Do tell." He raised his eyebrows, but continued. "In virtually all species hut ours, the female has a rigidly fixed cycle of conjugal acceptability." "But the human female has a -- " "I am not referring to that lunar cycle, unmentionable everywhere except in blatant magazine advertisements # he said shortly, "but to a cycle of desire. Of rut." "A pretty word." Her eyes began to glitter. "Mahomet taught that it occurred every eight days, Zoroaster nine days, Socrates and Solon agreed on ten. Everyone e#e, as far as I can discover, seems to disagree with these pundits, or to ignore the matter. Actually there are such cycles, but they are subtle at best, and differ in the individual from time to time, with age, physical experience, geography, and even emotional state. These cycles are vestigial; the original, natural cycle disappeared early in the history of the species, and has been trembling on the verge ever since. It will be a simple matter to bring it back." "May I ask how?" "You may not. It is a security matter." "May I then ask what effect you expect this development to have?" "Obvious, isn't it? The source of woman's persistent and effective control over man, the thing that makes him subject to all her intolerances, whims, and bewildering coyness, is the simple fact of her perennial availability. She has no regular and predictable cycle of desire. The lower animals have. During the brief time that a female mouse, a marten, or a mare is approachable, every male of her species in the vicinity will know of it and seek her out; will, in effect, drop everything to answer a basic call. But unless and until that call occurs, the male is free to think of other things. With the human female, on the other hand, the call is mildly present at all times, and the male is never completely free to think of other things. It is natural for this drive to be strong. It is unnatural indeed for it to be constant. In this respect Freud was quite correct; nearly every neurosis has a sexual Ijasis. We are a race of neurotics, and the great wonder is that we have retained any of the elements of sanity at all. I shall liberate humanity from this curse. I shall restore the natural alternations of drive and rest. I shall free men to think and women to take their rightful places as thinking individuals beside them, rather than be the forced-draft furnaces of sexual heat they have become." "Are you telling me," sajd Lucinda in a small, shocked voice, "that you have found a way to -- to neuterize women except for a few hours a month?" "I am and I have," said Dr. Lefferts. "And incidentally, I must say I am grateful to you for having turned me to this problem." He looked up sharply. "Where are you going, my dear?" 'Tve got to ththink," said Lucinda, and ran from the room. If she had stayed there for another fifteen seconds, she knew she would have crushed his skull in with the poker. W HO -- Oh, Lucinda! How nice. Come in... why, what's the matter?" "Jenny, Tve got to talk to you. Is Bob home?" "No. He's got night duty at the high temperature lab this week. Whatever is wrong?" "It's the end of the world," said Lucinda in real anguish. She sank down on the sofa and looked up at the younger woman. "My husband is putting a -- a chastity belt on every woman on earth." "A what?" "A chastity belt." She began to laugh hysterically. "With a timelock on it." c Jenny sat beside her. "Don't," she said. "Don't laugh like that. You're frightening me." Lucinda lay back, gasping. "You should be frightened... Listen to me, Jenny. Listen carefully, because this is the biggest thing that has happened since the deluge." She began to talk. Five minutes later Jenny asked dazedly, "You mean-if this crazy thing happens Bob won't... won't want me most of the time?" "It's you who won't do .any wanting. And when you don't, he won't want either... It isn't that that bothers me so much, Jenny, now that I've had a chance to think about it. Fm worried about the revolution." # 'What revolution?" "Why, this is going to cause the greatest social upheaval of all time! Once these cycles become recognized for what they are, there will be fireworks. Look at the way we dress, the 'way we use cosmetics. Why do we do it? Basically, to appear to be available to men. Practically all perfumes have a musk or musk-like base for that very reason. But how long do you think women will keep up the hypocrisy of lipstick and plunging necklines when men know better -- know that they couldn't possibly be approachable all the time? How many men will let their women appear in pub lie looking as if they were?" "They'll tie us up in the house the way I do Mitzi-poodle," said Jenny in an awed tone. "They'll leave us smugly alone with easy minds for three weeks out of four," said Lucinda, "and stand guard over us like bull elks the rest of the time, to keep other men away." "Lucinda!" Jenny squeaked and covered her face in horror. "What about other women? How can we compete with another woman when she's -- she's -- and we're not?" "Especially when men are conditioned the way they are. Women will want to stick to one man, more likely than not. But men -- men, building up pressures for weeks on end... " "There'll be harems again," said Jenny. "This is the absolute, final, bitter end of any power we ever had over the beasts, Jenny -- do you see that? All the old tricks -- the arch halfpromise, the come-on, the manipulations of jealousy -- they!! be utterly meaningless! The whole arsenal of womankind is based on her ability to yield or not to yield. And my husband is going to take the choice away from us. He's going to make it absolutely certain that at  one time we can't yield, and at another we must!" "And they'll never have to be nice to us at either time," added Jenny miserably. "Women," said Lucinda bitterly, "are going to have to work for a living." "But we do!" "Oh, you know what I mean, J enny! The iit-tul wife in the lit-fcul ome... that whole concept is based on women's perpetual availability. We're not going to be able to be home-makers, in that sense, at monthly intervals." Jenny jumped up. Her face was chalky. "He hasn't stopped any war," she ground out. Lucinda had never seen her like this. "He's started one, and it's a beaut. Lucinda, he's got to be stopped, even if you -- we have to... "Gome on." They started for Dr. Lefferts' house, striding along dike a couple of avenging angels. A h ; # said dr. lefferts, rising politely. "You brought Jenny. Good evening. Jenny." Lucinda planted herself in front of him and put her hands on her hips. "'You listen to me," she no growled. "You've got to stop that nonsense about changing women." "It is not nonsense and I shall do nothing of the kind " "Dr Lefferts," said Jenny in a quaking voice, "can you really do this -- tins awful thing?" "Of course," said the doctor. "It was quite simple, once the principles were worked out. # " "It was quite simple? You mean you've already -- " Dr. Lefferts looked at his watch. "At two o'clock this afternoon. Seven hours ago." "I think," said Lucinda quietly, "that you had better tell us just exactly what you did, and what we can expect." "I told you it is a security matter" "What has my libido to do with national defense?" "That," said the doctor, in a tone which referred to that as the merest trifle, "is a side issue. I coincided it with a much more serious project." "What could be more serious than... "There's only one thing that serious, from a security standpoint," said Lucinda. She turned to the doctor. "I know better than to ask you any direct questions. But if I assume that this horrible thing was done in conjunction with a super-bomb test -- just a guess, you understand -- is there any way for an H-blast to bring about a change in women such as you describe?" He clasped both hands around one knee and looked up at her in said... "And most skilfully phrased. Speaking hypothetically -- hypothetically, you understand," he interjected, waving a warning finger, "a hydrogen bomb has an immense power of diffusion. A jet of energy of that size, at that temperature, for even three or four microseconds, is capable of penetrating the upper reaches of the stratosphere. But the effect does not end there. The upward displacement causes great volumes of air to rush in toward the rising column from all sides. This in turn is carried upward and replaced, a process which continues for a considerable time. One of the results must be the imbalance of any distinct high or low pressure areas within several thousand miles, and for a day or two freak weather developments can be observed. In other words, these primary and secondary effects are capable of diffusing a -- ah -- substance placed in the bomb throughout the upper atmosphere, where, in a matter of days, it will be diffused throughout the entire envelope." Lucinda clasped her hands in a slow, controlled way, as if one of them planned to immobilize the other and thereby keep both occupied. "And is there any substance... , I'm still asking hypothetical questions, you understand -- is there anything which could be added to the hydrogen fusion reaction which might bring about these -- these new cycles in women?" "'They are not new cycles," said the doctor flatly. "They are as old as the development of warmblooded animals. The lack of them is, in biological terms, a very recent I ! development in an atypical mamma #; so recent and so small that it is subject to adjustment. As to your hypothetical question -- " he smiled -- "I should judge that such an effect is perfectly possible. Within the extremes of temperature, pressure, and radiation which take place in a fusion reaction, many things are possible. A minute quantity of certain alloys, for example, introduced into the shell of the bomb itself, or perhaps in die structure of a supporting tower or even a nearby temporary shed, might kky a number of phenomenal reaction chains. Such a chain might go through several phases and result in certain subtle isotopic alterations in one of the atmosphere's otherwise inert gases, say xenon. And this isotope, acting upon the adrenal cortex and the parathyroid, which are instrumental in controlling certain cycles in the human body, might very readily brin about the effect we are discussing in an atypical species." Lucinda threw up her hands and turned to Jenny. "Then that's it," she said wearily. "What's 'it'? What? I don't understand," whimpered Jenny. "What's he done, Lucinda?" "In his nasty, cold-blooded hypothetical way," said Lucinda, "he has put something in or near an H-bomb. which was tested today, which is going to have some effect on the air we breathe, which is going to do what we were discussing at your house." "Dr. Lefferts," said Jenny piteously. She went to him, stood looking down at him as he sat primly in his big easy chair. "Why -- why? Ju gt to annoy us? Just to keep us from having a little, petty influence over you?" "By no means # said the doctor. "I will admit that I might have turned my attention to the matter f for such reasons. But some concentrated thought brought up a number of extra-pol ations which are by no means petty." mantel, pince-nez in hand, the perfect picture of the Pedant At Home. "Consider," he said. "'Homo sapiens , in terms of comparative anatomy, should mature physically at # and emotionally between # and #. He should have a life expectancy of between # and # years. And he unquestionably should be able to live a life uncluttered by such insistent trifles as clothing conventions, unfunctional chivalries, psychic turmoils and dangerous mental and physical escapes into what the psychologists call romances. Women should phase their sexual cycles with those of the seasons, gestate their young longer, and eliminate the unpredictable nature of their psychosexual appetites -- the very basis of s all their insecurity and therefore that of most men. Women will not be chained to these cycles, Jenny, and become breeding machines, if that's what you fear. You will begin to live in and with these cycles as you live with a well-made and serviced automatic machine. You wall be liberated from the constant control and direction of your gomalic existence as you have been liberated from shifting gears in vour car."  "But... we're not conditioned for such a change!" blazed Lucinda. "And what of the fashion industry... cosmetics... the entertainment world... what's going to become of these and the them, and the people dependent on all those people if you do a thing like this?"  "The tiling is done. As for these people... tie paused. "Yes, there will be some disturbance. A considerable one. But in overall historical terms, it will be slight and it will be brief. I like to think that the television service man is one who was liberated by the cotton gin and the power loom." "It's... hard to think in historical terms just now." said Lucinda. "Jenny, come on." "Where are you going?" She faced him, her blued-steel eyes blazing. "Away from you. And I -- I think I have a warning to give to the women." "I wouldn't do that," he said dryly. "They'll find out in time. All you'll succeed in doing is to alert many women to the fact that they will be unattractive to their husbands at times when other women may seem more desirable. Women will not unite with one another, my dear, even to unite against men" There was a tense pause. Then jenny quavered, "How long did you say this -- this thipg will take?" "I did not say. I would judge between thirty-six and forty-eight hours." "I've got to get home." "May I come with you?" asked Lucinda. Jenny looked at her, her full face, her ample, controlled body, A surprising series of emotions chased themselves across her young face. She said, "I don't think... I mean... no, not tonight; I have to -- to -- goodnight, Lucinda." When she had gone, the doctor uttered one of his rare chuckles. "She has absorbed perhaps a tenth of this whole concept," he said, "but until she's surer of herself she's not going to let you or any woman near her husband." "You... you complacent pig ! # said Lucinda whitely. She stormed upstairs. "Lucinda I I'm -- glad you called." Something cold and tense deep inside Lucinda relaxed. She sat down slowly on the couch, leaned back comfortably with the telephone cradled between her cheek and her wide soft shoulder. "I'm glad you're glad, Jenny darling. It's been six weeks... how are you?" "I'm... all right now. It was pretty awful, for a while, not knowing how it would be, waiting for it to happen. And when it did happen, it was hard to get used to. But it hasn't changed things too much. How about you?" "Oh, I'm fine," said Lucinda. She smiled slowly, touched her tongue to her full lower lip. "Jenny, have you told anyone?" "Not a soul. Not even Bob. I p think he's a little bewildered. He thinks I'm being very... understanding. Lucinda, is it wrong for me to let him think that?" "It's never wrong for a woman to keep her knowledge to herself if it makes her more attractive," said Lucinda, and smiled again. "How's t)r. Lefferts?" "He's bewildered too. I suppose I've been a little... understanding too." She chuckled. Over the phone she heard Jenny's answering laughter. "The poor things," she said. "The poor, poor things. Lucinda -- " "Yes, honey." U I know how to handle this, now. But I don't really understand it. Do you?" "Yes, I think I do." "How can it be, then? How can this change in us affect men that way? I thought we would be the ones who would be turned off and on like a neon sign." tc What? Now wait a minute, Jenny! You mean you don't realize what's happened?" "That's what I just said. How could such a change in women do such a thing to the men?" "Jenny, I think you're wonderful, wonderful, wonderful," breathed Lucinda. "As a matter of fact, I think women are wonderful. I suddenly realized that you haven't the foggiest notion of what's happened, yet you've taken it in stride and used it exactly right!" "Whatever do you mean?" "Jenny., do you fee any difference in yourself?" "Why, no. All die difference is in Bob. That's what I -- " "Honey, there isn't any difference in you, nor in me, nor in any other woman. For the very first time in his scientific life, the great man made an error in his calculations."  There was silence for a time, then the telephone uttered a soft, delighted, long-drawn-out "Oh-hh-h-h..." Lucinda said, 'He's sure that in the long run it will have all the benefits he described -- die longer life expectancy, the subduing of insecurities, the streamlining of our manners and customs." "You mean that all men from now on will... " "I mean that for about twelve days in every two weeks, men can't do anything with us, which .is restful. And for forty-eight hours they can't do anything without us, which is -- " She laughed. u -- useful. It would seem that homo sapiens is still an atypical mammal." Jenny's voice was awed. "And I thought we were going to lose the battle of the sexes. Bob brings me little presents every single day, Lucinda!" 'He'd better. Jenny, put down that phone and come over here. I want to hug you. And -- " She glanced over at the hall closet, where hung the symbol of her triumph -- "I want to show you my new fur coat." down in a long arc, hung for over, waiting, an instant on columns of The thing at the controls had flame, then settled slowly into the great corded man-like arms. Its blast-pit. But no hatch opened; no skin was black with stiff fur. It had air lock swung out; no person left fingers ending in heavy' talons and The passengers rocketed through space in luxury, But they never went below decks because rumor had it that Satan himself manned the controls of T he Hell Ship. eyes bulging from the base of a massive skull, Its body was ponder ous, heavy, inhuman... After twenty minutes, a single air lock swung clear and a dozen armed men in Company uniforms went aboard. Still later, a truck lumbered up, the cargo hatch creaked aside, and a crane reached its long neck in for the cargo. Still no creature from the ship was seen to emerge. The truck driver, idly smoking near the hull, knew this was the Prescott , in from the Jupiter run -- that this was the White Sands Space Port, But he didn't know what was inside the Prescott and he'd been told it wasn't healthy to ask. Cene O'Neil stood outside the electrified ware that surrounded the White Sands port and thought of many tilings. He thought of the eternal secrecy surrounding space travel; of the reinforced hush-hush enshrouding Company ships. No one ever visited the engine rooms. No one in all the nation had ever talked with a spaceman. Gene thought of the glimpse he'd gotten of the thing in the pilot's window. Then his thoughts drifted back to the newsrooms of Galactic Press Service ; to Carter in his plush office. "Want to be a hero, son?" "Who, me? Not today. Maybe tomorrow. Maybe the next day." "Don't be cute. It's an assignment. Get into White Sands." "Who tried last?" "Tim Whiting." "Where is Whiting now?" "Frankly we don't know. But -- " "And the four guys who tried before Whiting?" "We don't know. But we'd like to find out." you will" ut there's There's always and the others. looking through wire. Sure there was a way. e st ions out loud. Then sit let them throw a noose round you . And there was a place where you could do the sitting in complete comfort , Where Whiting done it -- but only to vanish off face of ' the earth. Damn Carter to all hell! Gene turned and walked up the sandy road toward the place where the gaudy neons of the Blue Moon told hard working men where they could spend their money. The Blue Moon. It was quite a place. Outside, beneath the big crescent sign, Gene stopped to watch the crowds eddying in and out. Then he went in, to watch them cluster around the slot machines and bend in eager rows over the view slots of the peep shows. He moved into the bar, dropped low stools. He ordered  eyes drift around, beside him. He "Ain't o's been asking quesdown at the 'b face was He as if he was well dressed, with sever can give yon want -- for a price, nodded toward an e? lie in here, xl ' -- " # " he thought, move over here I come , and toward the door.    theman waite Gene moved up close. "You see, it's this way Something exploded against Gene's skull. Even as fiery darkness closed down he knew he'd found the way. But only a stupid newspaperman would take? it. Damn Carter! Gene went out. He seemed to be dreaming. Over him bent a repulsive, man-like face. But the man had fingernails growing on his chin where his whiskers should have been. And his eyes were funny -- walled, as though he bordered on idiocy. In the dream, Gene felt himself strapped into a hammock. Then somethin at him and made a terrible rac for a long time. Then it  j quiet except' for a t head. He went back to slee outfit, but it uniform. There and what there the back w there. It was a nurse to   Her soft hands fixed something over his eyes, something cold and wet. He felt grateful, but kept on trying to remember. Ah, he had it; the girls wore that kind of outfit in the Blue Moon in one of the skits they did, burlesquing a hospital. He took off the wet cloth and looked again. She was a dream. Even with her lips rougescarlet, her cheeks pink with makeup, her eyes heavy with artiface. "What gives, beautiful ?" He was surprised at the weakness of his voice. Her voice was hard, but nice, and it was bitter, as though she wanted hard people to know she knew the score, could be just a little harder. "You're a spaceman now! Didn't you know?" Gene grinned weakly. # T don't know a star from a street light. Nobody gets on the space crews these days -- it's a closed union." Her laugh was full of a knowledge denied him. "That's what I used to think!" She began to unstrap him from the hammock. Then she pushed back his hair, prodded at the purple knob on his head with careful fingertips. "How come you're on this ship?' asked Gene, wincing but letting her fingers explore. "Shanghaied, same as you. I'm from the Blue Moon. I stepped out between acts for a breath of fresh air, and wham, a sack over the head and here I am. They thought you might have a cracked skull. One of the monsters told me to check you. No doctor on the ship." Gene groaned. "Then I didn't dream it -- there is a guy on this ship with fingernails instead of a beard on his chin!" She nodded. "You haven't seen anything yet!" "Why are we here?" "You've been shanghaied to work the ship. Frn here for a different purpose -- these men can't get off the ship and they've got to be kept them contented. We've got ourselves pleasant jobs, with monsters for playmates, and we can't get fired. It'll be the rottenest time of our lives, and the rest of our lives, as far as I can see." Gene sank down, put the compress back on his bump. "I don't get it." "You will. Fm not absolutely sure Fm right, but I know a little more about it than you." "What's your name?"' "They call me Queenie Brant. A name that fits this business. My real name is Ann O'Donnell." "Queenie's a horse's name -- I'll call you Ann. Me, Fm Gene O'Neil." "That makes us both Irish," she said. He lifted the compress and saw the first really natural smile on her face. It was a sweet smile, introspective, dewy, young. "You were only a dancer" He said it flatly. For a long instant she looked at him. "Thanks. You got inside the gate on that one." "It's in your eyes Fm glad to know you, Ann. And I'd like to know you better." "You will. There'll be plenty of time  we're bound for lo." "Where's Io?" "One of Jupiter's moons, you Irish ignoramus. It has quite a colony around the mines. Also it has a strange race of people. But Ann O'Donnell is going to live there if she can get off this ship. I don't want fingernails growing on my chin." O'Neil sat up. "I get it now! It's something about the atomic drive that changes the crew!" "What else?" Gene looked at Ann, let his eyes rove over her figure. "Take a good look," she said bit' terly. "Maybe it won't stay like this very long!" . "We've got to get off this ship!" said Gene hoarsely... opened. A sharp-nosed face peered in, followed by a misshapen body of a man in a dirty blue uniform. Hair grew thick all around his neck and clear up to his ears. It also covered the skin from chin to shirt opening. The hair bristled, coarse as an animal's. His voice was thick, his words hissing as though his tongue was too heavy to move properly. "Captain wants you, O'Neil." Gene got up, took a step. He went clear across the room, banged against the wall. The little man laughed. "We're in space " Ann said. "We have a simulated gravity about a quarter normal. Here, let me put on your metal-soled slippers. They're magnetized to hold you to the floor " She bent and slipped the things on his feet, while Gene held his throbbing head. The little man opened the door and went out. Gene followed, his feet slipping along awkwardly. After a minute his nausea lessened. At the end of the long steel corridor the little man knocked, then opened the door to a low' rumble of command. He didn't enter, just stood aside for Gene. Gene walked in, stood staring. The eyes in the face he saw were black pools of nothingness, without emotion, yet behind them an active mind was apparent. Gene realized this hairy thing was the Captaineven though he didn't even wear a shirt! "You've shanghaied me," said Gene. "I don't like it." The voice was huge and cold, like wind from an ice field. "None of us like it, chum. But the ships have got to sail. You're one of us now', because we're on our way and by the time you get there, there'll be no place left for you to work, unless it's in a circus as a freak." "I didn't ask for it," said Gene. "You did. You wanted to know too much about the crew -- and if you found out, you'd spread it. You see, the drives are not what they were cooked up to be -- the atomics leak, and it wasn't found out until too late. After they learned, they hid the truth, because the cargo we bring is worth mil lions. All the shielding they've used so far only seems to make it worse. But that won't stop the ships -- they'll get crews the way they got you, and nosey people will find out more than they bargain for." "I won't take it sitting down!" said Gene angrily. The Captain ignored him. "Start saying sir. It's etiquette aboard ship to say sir to the Captain. 'Til never say sir to anyone who got me into this..." The Captain knocked him down. Gene had plenty of time to block the blow. He had put up his arms, but the big fist went right through and crashed against his chin. Gene sat down hard, staring up at the hairy thing that had once been a man. He suddenly realized the Captain was standing there waiting for an excuse to kill him. Through split and bleeding lips, while his stomach turned over and his head seemed on the point of bursting. Gene said: "Yes, sir!" The Captain turned his back, sat down again. He shoved aside a mass of worn charts, battered instruments, cigar butts, ashtrays with statuettes of naked girls in a half-dozen startling poses, comic books, illustrated magazines with sexy pictures, and made a space on the top. He thrust forward a sheet of paper. He picked up a fountain pen, flirted it so that .ink spattered the tangle of junk on his desk, then handed it to Gene. "Sign on the dotted line." Gene picked up the document. It was an ordinary kind of form, an application for employment as a spacehand. third class. The ship was not named, but merely called a cargo boat. This was the paper the Company needed to keep the investigators satisfied that no one was forced to work on the ships against their will Anger blinded him. He didn't take the pen. He just stood looking at the Captain and wondering how to keep himself from being beaten to death. After a long moment of silence the Captain laid the pen down, grinned horribly. He gave a snort. "It's just a formality. Pm supposed to turn these things over to the authorities, but they never bother us anymore. Sign it later, after you've learned. You'll be glad to sign, then." "What's my job, Captain?" "Captain Jorgens, and don't forget the sir!" "Captain Jorgens, sir." "I'll put you with the Chief Engineer. He'll find work for you down in the pile room." The Captain laughed a nasty laugh, repeating the last phrase with relish. "The pile room! There's a place for you, Mr. O'Neil. When you decide to sign your papers, we'll get you a job in same other part of this can!" Gene found his way back to the cabin he had just left. The little guy with the hairy neck was there, leering at the girl. "Put you in the pile gang didn't he?" Gene nodded, sat down wearily. "I want to sleep," he said. "Nuts," said the little man. "I'm here to take you to the Chief Engineer. You go on duty in half an hour. Come on!" Gene got up. He was too sick to argue. Ann looked at him sympathetically, noting his split lips. He managed a grin at her, "If I never see you again, Ann, it's been nice knowing you, very Bice." 'Til see you, Gene. They'll find us tougher than they bargained for." some of the atomic power stations he'd seen. Only smaller. There was no heavy concrete shielding, no lead walls. There was shielding around the central pile, and Gene knew that inside it was the hell of atomic chain reaction under the control of the big levers that moved the cadmium bars. There was a steam turbine at one end, and a huge boiler at the other. Gene didn't even try to guess how the pile activated the jets that drove the space ship. Somehow it "burned" the water. This pile had been illegal from the first. Obviously some official had been bribed to permit the first use of it on a spaceship. Certainly no one who knew anything about the subject would have allowed human beings to work around a thing like this. Gene's skin crawled and prickled with the energies that saturated the room. Little sparks leaped here and there, off his finger-tips, off his nose. The Chief Engineer was on a metal platform above the machinery level. The face had hair all over it, even on the eyelids. The eyes, popping weirdly, were double. They looked as if second eyes had started growing inside the original ones. They weren't reasonable; they weren't even sane. The look of them made Gene sick, The Engineer shook his head back and forth to focus the awful, mutilated eyes. His voice was infinitely weary, strangely muffled. "Another sacrifice to Moloch, an's the pity! So they put you down here, as if there was anything to be done? Well, it'll be nice to work with someone who still has his buttons -- as long as they last. Sit down." Gene sat down and the metal chair gave him a shock that made him jump. "I don't know anything about this kind of work." The man shrugged, "Who does? The pile runs itself. Ain't enough of it moves to need much greasing. You ought to be able to find the grease cups -- they're painted red. Fill them, wipe off the dust, and wait. Then do it over again." "What's the score on this bucket?" "We're all signed on with a billy to the knob. And kept aboard by a guard system that's pretty near perfect. After awhile the emanations get to our brains and wc don't care anymore. Then we're trusted employees. Only reason I don't blow her loose, it wouldn't do any good." He got up, a fragile old body clad in dirty overalls. He beckoned Gene to follow him. He led the way to a periscope arrangement over the shielded pile. Gene peered in. It was like a look into boiling Hell. As Gene stared, the old man talked in his ear. "Supposed to be perfectly shielded, and maybe they are. But something gets out. I think it happens in the jet assembly. A tiny trickle of high pressure steam crosses the atomic beam just above a pinhole that leads into the jet tube. It's exploded by the beam, exploded into God knows what, and tlte result is your jet. It's a wonderful drive, with plenty of power for the purpose. But I think it forms a strong field of static over the whole shell of the ship, a kind of sphere of reflection that throws the emanations back into the ship from every point. Just my theory, but it explains why you get these physical changes, because that process of reflection giveS a different ray than was observed in the ordinary shielded jet." Gene nodded, asked: "Can I look at the jet assembly?" "Ain't no way to look at it! Ids sealed dp to hold in tire expanding gases from that exploded steam. Looking in this periscope is what changed my eyes. Only other place the unshielded emanations could escape is from the jet chamber. Only way they can get back into the ship is by reflection from some ionized layer around the ship. If I could talk to some of those bigbrained birds that developed this drive. I'd sure have tilings to say." Gene was convinced the old man knew what he was talking about. "Why don't you try to put your information where it'll do some good? How about the Captain?" "He's coocoo." The old man slapped the cover back on the periscope, tottered back to his perch on the platform. "He sure has changed the last two years. Won't listen to reason." Gene squatted on the steps, just beneath the old engineer's chair. The old man seemed glad to have someone to talk to. "It's got us trapped. And it's so well covered up from the people. Old spacers are changed physically, ' changed mentally. They know they cant go back to normal life, because it's gone too far. They'd be freaks. No woman would want a monstrosity around. Besides, it don't stop, even after you leave the ships. God knows what we" #I look like in the end." Gene shivered. "But you're all grown men! A fight with no chance of winning is better than this! Why do you take it?" "Because the mind changes along with the body. It goes dead in some ways, gets more active in others. The personality shifts inside, until you're not sure of yourself, and can't make decisions any more. That's why nobody does anything. Something about those rays destroys the will. Nobody leaves the ships." "I will!" Gene said confidently. "When the time comes, I'll go. All Hell can't stop me." The old man yawned. "Hope you do, son. Hope you do. I'm going to take me a nap." He propped his feet up on the platform rail and in seconds was snoring. Gene clenched his fists, growing despair in his thoughts.  "Tain't no worse than dying in a war," muttered the old man in his sleep. learned. He understood why these men didn't actively resent the deal they were getting. No wonder the secrecy was so effective! The radiations deadened the mind, gave one the feeling of numbness, so that nothing mattered but the next meal, the next movie in the recreation lounge, the next drink of water. Values changed and shifted, and none of them seemed important. The chains that began to bind him were far stronger than steel. The chains were mental deterioration, degeneration, mutation within the very cells of the mind. He knew that now he must tend this monster ft forever, grease and wipe the ugly metal of it, and sit and talk idly to MacNamara, its keeper. He realized it, and didn't know how to care ! The anger and hate came later. The real, abiding anger, and the living hate. At first the numbness, the sudden incomprehensible enormity of what had happened to him, then the anger. Hate churned and ground away inside him, getting stronger by the hour. It all revolved around the Captain who tramped eternally around the corridors bellowing orders, punching with his huge fists. He knew there was more to it; the lying owners of the Company, the bribe-taking officials, the health officers who failed to examine the ships and the men and the ships' papers. But somehow it all boiled down to the Captain. Sometimes he was sure he must be crazy  already. Sometimes he would wake up screaming from a nightmare only to find reality more horrible.  V  Then he would go to Ann. Ann wits not the only woman aboard ship. There were three others, and to the crew of twenty imprisoned, enslaved men they represented all beauty, all womanhood. They lived with the men -- as the men -- and nobody cared. Here, so close to the raging elementals of the pile, life itself was elemental. As one of them expressed it to Gene: "Why worry? We're all sterile from the radioactivity anyway. Or didn't you know?" She had been on the ship for years, and was covered with a fine fur, like a cat's. Her eyes were wide, placid, empty; an animal's unthinking eyes. Gene prayed Ann would never turn monster before his eyes ; hoped desperately they could get away in time. "We've got to fight, Ann," he said to her one day. "We must find a way to get off at the end of the trip, or it will be too late for us to live normal lives. It's then of never. Besides that, we've got to warn people of what's going on. They think space travel is safe...In time this could effect the whole' race. The world must be told, so something can be done." Ann's young face showed signs of the strain. The fear of turning into some hideous thing was preying on her mind. She spoke rapidly, her voice breaking a little. "I've been talking to several of the crew y the old-timers, trying to get an understanding of why nothing is done. It's this way: when the ships land, guards come aboard. They're posted at the cargo locks and the passenger entrances. The only door aboard the ship that leads to the passenger compartment is in the Captain's cabin, and it's locked from both sides. Even our Captain never meets the passengers. There's only one chance, a mutiny. Then we could open the door, show the passengers." "It wouldn't do any good. When we landed, they'd find a way to shut us all up before we got to anybody. They've had a lot of practice keeping this quiet. They know the answers." She stamped a foot angrily. "It was you who said we had to fight! Now you say it's hopeless!" Gene leaned against the wall and passed a hand across his eyes. He looked at Ann's flushed beauty and managed a grin. "Guess I'm getting as bad as the rest of them, baby. We'll fight. Sure we'll fight." Schwenky was a gigantic Swede. He was the boss freight handler. It was his job to sort the cargo for the next port of call. He would get it into the cargo lock, then seal the doors so nobody would ttfy to smuggle themselves out with the freight. Schwenky was intensely loyal and stupid enough not to understand the real reason behind their imprisonment -- which was why he held his job. No one got by Schwenky. But this time, in Mar sport, something was missing. They'd driven the trucks up to the cargo port, unloaded everything, and then compared invoices with the material. They swore some claimed machinery parts were due them. Schwenky swore he'd placed them in the cargo lock, and that the truckers were trying to hold up the Company. The Captain allowed the truckers' claim and after the ship had blasted off into space, called Schwenky in to bawl him out. They must have gotten really steamed up, because Gene and Frank Maher heard the racket clear down on the next deck where they were cleaning freight out of a sealed compartment for the next stop. Gene and Frank raced up the ladders to the top deck, and Gene found the bi'eak he had prayed for. Schwenky holding the Captain against the wall; beating the monstrosity that had once been a man with terrible fists. Gene felt a sudden thrill. In a situation like this you used any weapon you could find. Schwenky was a deadly weapon. Gene laid a hand on Schwenky's massive shoulder. "Hold it man! You'll kill him!" Schwenky turned a face, red and popeyed, to Gene. "The Captain make a mistake. He try to knock Schwenky down. No man do that to Schwenky." "When he comes to, he'll lock you in the brig, put you on bread and water... " Suddenly Schwenky realized the enormity of his offense. It was obvious from his face that he considered himself already dead. "Nah, my friend Gene! Now they kill Schwenky. Bad ! But what I do?" Gene eyed him carefully. "Put the Captain in the brig, of What else? The "Lock him up, eh? Good idea! Then we think, you and I, what we do next. Maybe something come to us, eh?" Gene bent over the Gap tain's body, found the pistol in his hip pocket, put it in his own. He took the ring of keys from the belt. "Bring him along, Schwenky. If we meet anyone, I'll use this." Gene patted the gun. "I won't let them hurt my friend, Schwenky." "Damn! let them come! I fix them! Don't have to shoot them. I got fists!" "I'd rather be shot, myself," said Gene, watching the ease with which the giant freight handler lifted the huge body of the Captain, tossing it over his shoulder like a sack of stteiw Til go ahead" said Frank Maher. "If I run into Perkins, the First, I'll whistle once. If I run into Symonds, the Second, I'll whistle twice. I don't think there's another soul aboard we need worry about. All we got to do is slap the Cap in the brig, round up Perkins and Symonds, and the ship is ours. What worries me, Gene, then what do we do?" "It's Schwenky' s mutiny," grinned Gene. "Ask him." "Nah!" said Schwenky hastily. "I don' know. Maybe we just sail on till we find good place, leave ship, go look for job." Maher said, "Me with my 'lumpy face? And the Chief with hair on his cheekbones and double eyeballs? And Heinie with fingernails growing where his collar button should be? I wonder what we cun do, if T hey got down the first stairwell, but passing along the rather lengthy companionway to the next stairhead, they heard Maher whistle twice. Schwenky .put the Captain down, conked him with one massive fist to make sure he stayed out, then stood there, waiting. The Second came up out of the stairwell, turned and started toward them. Gene put his hand on the gun butt, waiting until he had to pull it. Schwenky said: "Come here, Mr. Perkins, sir. Look see what has happened!" The Englishman peered at the shapeless, hairy mass of the unconscious Captain. His face went white. Gene knew he was wondering if he could keep the crew from mutiny without the Captain present to cow them. Perkins straightened, his face a pallid mask in the dimness. "What happened, Schwenky?" "This, Mr. Perkins, sir -- " said Schwenky. He slapped an open palm against the side of Perkins' head. Perkins sprawled full length on the steel deck, but he wasn't out, which surprised Gene. He lay there, staring up at the gigantic Swede, his face half red from the terrible blow, the other half white with the fear in him. His hand was tugging at his side and Gene realized he was after his gun. Gene pulled out his own weapon even as he leaped upon the slim body of the man on the floor. His feet missed the moving arm, the hand came out with a snub-hosed automatic in it. Gene grabbed it, bore down went off, the bullet ri the wali-pMes with a . ut the gun dieting off slugged the man across the head with the barrel of the Captain's gun. Perkins went limp. Maher came up now and grabbed Perkins' gun. "Lead on," said Gene. He picked Perkins up and put him over his shoulder. Schwenkv retrieved the  slumbering Captain and they proceeded on their way to the cell on the bottom deck. But the shot had been heard, and from above came the sound of running feet. Gene began to trot, ab most fell down the last flight of stairs, went along the companionway at a run. At the cell door he dropped Perkins, tried four or five keys frantically. One fit. He pulled open the door and Schwenky drove in, kicking the body of Perkins over the sill. The Captain dropped heavily to the deck and Schwenky was out again. Gene was locking the door when he heard the shout from Symonds, running toward them. "What's going on there, men?" Schwenky started to amble toward the dark, wiry Second, his big face smiling like that of a simpleton. "We haf little trouble, Mr. Symonds, sir. Maybe we should call you, but we did not haf time. Everything is all right now. You come see, we explain everything , . " He made a grab forthe little Second Mate's neck with one big paw. But the Second was wary, ducked quickly, was off. Gene and Maher sprang after him. Gene shouted: "Stop or I'll fire, Symonds! You're all alone now!" Gene let one ho t angle off the wall, close beside the fleeing form, but the man didn't stop. Instead he headed for the bridge. Gene realized he could lock himself in, keep them from the ship controls. He could hold out there the rest of the voyage. "We've got to stop him ! # Maher close behind, they ran up the stairs on the Second's heels. Up the companionway they pounded, the Second increasing his lead. A door opened ahead of him and Ann O'Donnell appeared. Symonds cursed and tried to pass her. Ann deftly slid out one pretty leg and the officer turned a somersault, and brought up against the wall at the foot of the stairs to the upper deck and the bridge. But the Second was too frightened to let a little thing like a fall stop him. He went scrambling up the stairs on all fours. Gene was still too far away, and Ann moved like a streak of light. She sailed through the air in a long dancer's leap and with two bounds was up the stair, ahead of the scrambling, fearstricken officer. "Out of my way, bitch," and Symonds hurled himselftoward Ann. Gene leaped forward, but he needn't have bothered. Ann lifted one of her educated feet, caught the Second under the chin and he came down the stair like a sack of meal. Gene caught his full weight. The two men fell in a scramble of flailing arms and legs, knocking the props out from under Maher, who had started out after them. Just how the mixup might have turned out they were not to know, weight of upon out a scream and Symonds # too crushed a sound. ' C minutes later came back to conscioushis head resting in Ann O'Donnelfs lap while her prodded him here and , looking for broken bones, m dead for sure groaned there nr i i "You've just had the wind knocked out of you. You'll be all fight' and Ann let his head fall from her grasp with a thump. She stood up, a little abashed at the going' over she'd been giving him. # re re my mutineers?"Gene asked. 'Went to lock Symonds with the others. What is going to happen how? Fm not sure I like this development, now it's happened." u You should have thought of that before you tripped Symonds # said Gene. "But F#I admit there are Jems. For instance, with all the officers in the brig, how can we be this atomic junk the right correct direction ?" down beside see we can # .  . them broodin levers and buttons w! control their baffled frowns. took on a worried he said. "You goc We run ship, let officers Maher scratched one reying hair over his left eye rest of his skull was covered wit brown bumps like I "It's just possible well wreck ship, let the air out of her or some we experiment he thing, if warned. "Go get M.acNamara' Gene. "He's been on the ship longer than any of us. Maybe hell know." I He didn't. "All I know is grease cups " he reminded Gene. ours later eighteen men and four women gathered together in the recreation room to discuss a lan of action.Everyone had his or er ideas, but after an hour of wrangling, they got nowhere. Finally Gene held up a hand and shouted for silence. "Let's decide who's boss, follow orders' he said. "If be so bold, how about me?" "Yah!" said Schwenky I what you say. I like you!" Old MacNamara himself. "Do nothin ought to stick to the lives of those  to take our places have to guarded pile a W  r anxious would happen now if we gave up!" Gene spoke up again. "Let me summarize the position we # re in -- maybe then we can make a better decision." "Go ahead." said Ann. The others nodded and fell silent, waiting. Gene cleared his throat. "The way it looks to me, we've had a lucky accident in getting control of the ship. So far, we've  not contacted the passengers. They know nothing of the change that's taken place. As it is, I see no point in contacting them. It might force us to face another mutiny, that of the passengers, who would regard us as what we are, mutineers, and when they found we weren't going to our destination, they'd certainly not all take it lying down. Point number one, then, is to ignore the passengers, keep the knowledge of a mutiny from them. "Now, our real purpose in this mutiny is to expose this whole vicious secret slavery, tell Earth of the danger of the unshielded piles in space ships, destroy the Company's monopoly, and bring about new research which I'm sure would eventually overcome the difficulty. Just how are we going to do that? The answer is simple -- we must get back to Earth, and we must get back in a way the Company will not be able to intercept us. As I understand it, this won't be easy. The Company is in complete control of space travel, and they have die ships to knock us out of space before we can get near Earth. Somehow we've got to win through. Gan we do it by a direct return to Earth? I doubt it. How ever, say we do it. Then where do we go? The government might look upon us as mutineers and thus give the Company a chance to quash the whole affair. "So we've got to go directly to the people, who, once they see us, and realize what space travel with these piles means, will demand an explanation with such public feeling even the government can't avoid a showdown. It's the secrecy we must break. Thus, we must land on Earth with the biggest possible splurge of publicity. We've got to do it so no Company ship can prevent it. "Then there's this to consider. Most of you would find it a difficult thing to take up a life on. Earth. I know that many of you want to take off for some remote world, and try to live out your lives by yourselves. I say that would be a cowardly thing to do. So, before we decide anything else, I say let's decide here and now that the only thing we will do is go back to Earth." One of the most grotesquely deformed of the crew spoke up. "No woman would ever look at me," he said defiantly. "Children would stare at me and scream in terror. I've suffered enough. Why should I suffer more?" The woman in the fine fur got to her feet and walked over to him. She sat down beside him and took his hand in hers. "I will look at you," she said. "When we get back to Earth, I Will many you and live wifh you -- if you are brave enough to take me there." For an instant the crewman ft  stared at her out of his horribly bulging popeyes. then he swallowed hard and clutched her hand fiercely. "The Devil hinfself will hot keep me from it ! # he said hoarsely. Gene, staring at the man, felt a warm hand slip into his, and he turned to find Ann, "I think that answers for all of us," she said. The room rang with the shouts of approval. Once more Gene began talking. "All right, then, I've a plan. First, we'll try to find out how to maneuver this craft. I believe we can persuade one of the Mates to show us the controls without much trouble." "Yah!" interrupted Schwenky. "They show!"... "We'll set a course for Earth by the sun. We'll come in with the sun at our back, which means we'll have to make a wide circle off the traveled spacelanes, through unknown space, and come in from the direction of the inner planets, which are uninhabited and unvisited. Also, with the sun behind us, we won't be observed from Earth. Then, with all our speed, we'll come in, land at high noon in Chicago, right in front of the offices of the Sentinel , the newspaper for which I work." There was a chorus of exclamations. Ann looked at him in amazement. "You, a newspaperman!" she gasped. "Yes. I was sent out by my boss to find out what was behind the secrecy of the space ships. I got shanghaied as a crew member. Now, with your help, maybe I can complete rriy assignment. Once we get to my boss, the show will be over. He'll blast the story wide open " "Wonderful!" shouted Maher. "Come, Schwenky! We will get Perkins and make him show us how to run the ship!" Schwenky chortled in glee. "Yah! We get. By golly, I know that Gene O'Neill is good mail! Maybe I get my picture in newspaper?" Maher stared at him. "God forbid!" he said. "Unless it's in the cbmic section!" "Yah!" agreed Schwenky. "In comic section!" crossed Earth's orbit and headed in behind the planet in the plane of the sun, the meteorite hit. It tore a great hole in the passenger side of the ship, and knocked out the port jets. The ship veered crazily under the influence of its lopsided blast, and the crew was hurled against the wall and pinned there as the continuing involuntary maneuver built up acceleration. Gene, who had been in his bunk, was pressed against the wall by a giant hand. Savagely he fought to adjust himself into a more bearable position, then tried to figure out what had happened. Obviously the ship was veering about, out of control."Meteorite!" he gasped. "We've been hit."   He pulled himself from the bunk, slid along the wall to the ddtsU It was all he could do to open it, but once in the companionway outside he found that he could crawl along one wall, off the floor, in an inching progress. He ma.de it finally to the control room, and forced his body around the door jamb and inside. Against the far wall Maher was plastered, dazed, but conscious. At his feet lay Heinie, his head crushed, obviously dead. "Cut off the rest of the jets!" gasped Maher. T can't make it!" Gene crawled slowly around the room, following the wall, until he could reach the controls, then he pulled the lever that controlled the jet blast. The ship's unnatural veering stopped instantly and both Maher and Gene dropped heavily to the floor. Gene was up first and helped Maher to his feet. Together they turned to the indicators. "Passenger deck's out!" said Maher. "Except for a few compartments. The automatic seals have operated. But there must be somebody left alive in them." "We've got to get them," said Gene. "But first, we've got to check up on what damage has been done here, and how many casualties we have." "Heinie' s dead," said Maher. "He hit the wall with his head " Gene shuddered, and deep in his stomach nausea churned. 'He thought of Ann and his blood froze In his veins. "You take below decks. IT! go up," he said. Ann's cabin was on the deck above. Maher nodded and staggered away. Gene scrambled up the stairwell as fast as he could, and ran down the. corridor. At Ann's door he stopped, turned the knob. The door opened. The room was empty. Suddenly he heard running footsteps, and Ann threw herself into his arms, sobbing. "Where were you?" he asked, almost savagely. "I went to your cabin, to see if you were hurt. What happened to the ship?" "Meteorite hit us. Knocked out the passenger deck. Most of the passengers will be dead, but we've got to go in and rescue the survivors." Doors were opening here and there and the crew members able to make it were congregating around them. They went to the recreation room. There Gene counted noses. Five crewmen were missing. Of those present, six men were injured, and one woman exhibited a black eye, accentuating her other abnormalities. The three prisoners were reported unharmed. "What about the missing men?" Gene asked. "Three dead," Maher replied, "two badly hurt. We'll need somebody to look after them." "I'll go," volunteered Ann. The woman in fur stepped forward also, and they left the room behind Maher and Schwenky. Gene faced the rest. "We've got a real problem now. With a reduced crew, we'll have to finish a trip that would have been tough with an uninjured ship. But first, we've got to search the passenger deck and remove the survivors. All of you who are able, put on pressure suits and come with me He led the way to the locker containing the pressure suits. Seven men, those who were not too deformed to don the suits, made up the party. Gene led the way to the Captain's stateroom, ordered the door sealed behind them, then opened the only door to the damaged deck. The air rushed out as the door swung open, and suddenly complete silence descended upon them. There would be no more communication between them except for signs. In an hour they had determined the truth. All passengers but one, a woman, had been killed instantly. The woman was unconscious, but suffering only from bruises. It had been necessary, after discovering her unpierced cabin, to return to the deck above and cut through with a torch. When she regained consciousness and saw her rescuers, she screamed. "That'll give us some idea of how the people back on Earth will receive us" said Gene. "If we get there, that is." Later, in the control room, Maher and MacNamara gave their report. "We can make it," said Mac  Namara, "but we'll come in limping like a wounded moose. If any of the Company ships sight us, we'll be a sitting duck. But maybe it will be better that way. This is like war, and some of us must die ..." His voice trailed off in a mumble. r "Some of us are dying," said Maher. "But he's right, Gene; we can make it, with luck. We'll not be able to come in fast, nor land in the city, but we'll make it to Earth." "That's enough," decided Gene. "If we can land near Chicago, I think I can manage the rest." They turned to the controls, and MacNamara went back to his pile room. Once more the ship limped on. this time directly toward the  # ball of Earth, looming a scant goal. Then tragedy struck again. The cabin on the passenger deck from which they had removed the sole survivor blew its door, and the air on the deck above rushed out through the hole they had burned into the cabin. It had been forgotten, and it meant the lives of three more crew members. Then, as they prepared to bring the ship into the atmosphere, Maher, peering through the telescope, let out a shout. "Company ship, coming up fast! They're after us!" Gene leaped to the telescope and peered through. Far to the left, a glowing silver streak in the sky, was the familiar shape of a space ship, growing larger by the minute. Studying it, Gene saw that it was an armed cruiser. "They've got wise," said Maher. "I thought they would, when we didn't check in at Io. Probably radioed back to be on the lookout for us." "Call MacNamara," said Gene. "We've got to see if he can set us down faster. Maybe there's some way to step up that pile " Maher rushed off, and Ann came in. "What's up?" she asked. "Cruiser after us," said Gene, his face grim. "Looks like we won't get to Chicago unless MacNamara has something up that old sleeve of his." Ann went white, and together they waited for the old Engineer. When he came in, Gene gestured to the telescope. "Take a look " MacNamara squinted through the eyepiece with his double popeyes. "Don't see a thing," he grumbled. "Well, it's a Company Cruiser, gunned to the limit. She's going to be near enough to shoot us down in about three hours." "Three hours, you say?" MacNamara scratched his head. "How near we to Earth?" "You could make it in die lifeboat." Gene snorted. "That Cruiser'd shoot down the lifeboat as easy as it will the ship -- a lot easier." "If they can catch you," said MacNamara. "Some of us must die, that the rest may live." "Don't start . that again, Mac," said Maher impatiently. "What we want to know' is whether you can soup up that pile so we can beat that Cruiser dovn to Earth?" "Not a thing I can do," said the Chief Engineer. "We've only one set of tubes. Full power would shoot us all over die sky. But I can do something as good" "What?" T The old Engineer considered them through his double eyes. "The rest of you'll take the lifeboat and make for Earth.  I'll remain here on the ship and shield your flight. I'm sure I can hide the little boat for awhile, and then, even with one jet, I think I can delay the cruiser until you get away. Someone's got to make a sacrifice. I'm old, and I didn't want any of this to begin with. Maher gasped. "Mac, you old fool. D'ya mind if I apologize for what I just said? But you're right, that's a possible answer. Only I'll be the one to stay." "Do you know how to adjust the pile and the jets to make a weapon out of them?" asked MacNamara. "No... began Maher. MacNamara grinned. "Nor am I going to tell you! So, you see, you can't be the one to stav." Maher gripped the old man's hand and pumped it. "You win " he said. "You old... crackpot!" There was real affection in his voice. "Then be off with you," said the Chief Engineer. "You've not a minute to lose. Every man jack of you into the boat, including the Captain and the Mates. I'll not have my ship cluttered up with extra hands that might cramp my style... And turning, the old man made his way back to the pile room, mumbling to himself. Eyes wet, Gene gave the orders to abandon ship, and within thirty minutes every living soul was aboard the lifeboat. MacNamara had finished his work with the pile and was back in the control room, waiting for the lifeboat to cast off. As it did so, he waved, then turned to the controls. f As the lifeboat darted away on its chemical jet engines, they could see the old man maneuvering the big ship so as to keep it ever between them and the Cruiser. An hour later when they were within a hundred thousand miles of Earth, MacNamara sent up a flare denoting surrender. Tensely they watched the distant speck of light that was the ship with MacNamara on , it. Then, around its side came the Company Cruiser, steering in toward it to make the capture. It was scarcely a thousand miles from the disabled ship. Gradually it drew closer, then edged in. Now it was only a few miles away, and at this distance, both specks seemed to merge., "They got him!" Maher said. "Yah!" Schwenky boomed, disappointment in his voice. "Me, I should have been the one to stay. I would slap them." Suddenly, out in space, a bright flower grew. A flower of incandescent light that blossomed with terrifying rapidity, until it seemed to engulf all space in the area of the two ships. The familiar sphere ploding atom bomb hung there in the heavens an instant, then it was gone. In its place was only a vast cloud of smoke, the dust and scattered atoms that were all that remained of two gigantic space ships. "He detonated the pile!" said Gene. "He turned himself into an atom bomb!" "Yah!" said Schwenky, his voice strangely muted. "Yah!" Awkwardly he turned and patted Ann's head as she began to sob. Schwenky proudly, holding the front page of the newspaper up for all to see. "I have my picture in the paper! Is it not njce?" Laughing, Ann kissed the big Swede right on the lips, and hugged him, paper and ail. "It's beautiful, you big Jug!" she said. "The handsomest picture I've ever seen in any paper." "Nah!" denied Schwenky. "It is not the handsomest. All of us have our pictures in the paper. We are all very good looking! Not only Schwenky. Is it not so. Gene, my friend?" Gene grinned at him, and at the others. Maher pounded him on the back, and over the uproar came the voice of the editor of the Sentinel. "Telephone for Mr. Schwenky!" Schwenky looked dazed, cocked his big ears at the editor. "For Schwenky?" he asked stupidly. "Telephone? Who would call Schwenky on the telephone?" "How do I know?" said the editor. "It's some lady... He thrust the phone into the big Swede's hand. "Lady?" said Schwenky wonderingly. "Hello ,... lady... he spoke into the receiver, his booming voice making it rattle. "The other... " began Gene, then desisted. "Never mind, she'll hear you... "What? You want to marry me? Lady... " Schwenky's eyes bulged even more, and he roared into the transmitter. "Lady! You wait! I come!" He thrust the phone into the editor's hands and made for the door like a lumbering bull. "Where you going?" yelled Gene. Schwenky halted, turned with a big grin. "I go to marry lady. She asked me to become my wife!" "Where is she?" asked Gene. "Where are you going to meet her?" Schwenky looked stupidly at the now silent phone. "By golly! I forget to ask her!" There was tragedy in his voice. "Now I never find her!" Mr The editor laughed. "Never mind -- you'll get a hundred more proposals before the day's over. You can take your pick!" Schwenky' s eyes opened wide. Then he grinned again. "Yah!" he roared.' "I take my pick! She will be beautiful! Yah!" The chatter of the teletype interrupted him, and the editor turned to watch the tape as it came from the machine. The he began to read: "Washington. April #. President Walworth has grounded all spaceships and ordered all those enroute to proceed to the nearest port. A Congressional committee has been picked, including top members of the cabinet, to investigate the ships, the atomic drives, and the system of secret slavery among crews. In a statement to the Press, President Walworth said that space travel wall not be resumed until proper shields are developed. But he added that he had been informed by leading physicists that the problem can be solved within a year if sufficient funds were available. Said the President: T will see that the funds are made available!' " The editor dropped the tape and turned to Gene. "I have one more bit of information, this one direct from the President by phone. He has asked me to inform you that he has appointed you new head of that?" "Federal Agency for Space Travel," grinned the editor. "And congratulations. I hate to lose a good reporter, but maybe you'll be back after you finish in Washington -- at a substantial increase in salary." Gene grinned back. "Maybe I will," he said. "And Fll need the money." He put an arm around Ann and drew her to him. "Tw'o can't live as ckeap as one, you know." is a very personable young man who lives in P.O. Box #, he has labored mightily and thanklessly to evolve and create the "'Science Fiction News Letter." This, according to Bob's letterhead is "the leading newspaper of the science fiction world." The first item in the oldest issue of this newsletter we have at hand (Feb. #) reads: slick fantasy and scific magazine appear soon. Details scarce and Mag will follow gen of Time . Title not yet item from the last issue ' in... the Caro a... fan club Monsters of ished the first organised monsters eager address The Little Lynn Hickman s # W. Bel Statesville s N. C. The two items quoted are hot necessarily representative of # the broader content of Bob TuckeEs newsletter. But Bob Tucker is certainly representative of that broad and interesting brotherhood -- the science-fiction fan clubs. Even the moreso because his newsletter rep resents no single club, but caters to the many hundreds of them all over the world. An examination of the letter shows it to be neatly almost professionally done. But more tit ah this, it shows the heart and sou the work and sweat that goes into it. Bob's circulation has risen from a handful of giveaways in a paid circulation in # copies. This rise is live of two factors public interest in and Tucker's amazin age, or maybe plain ness. Bob Tucker is by any means, which has no hairs in his # flash iiifor pr ;tion editors and who will in the next F. There is also Captain , whose very jwsletter circulates about # hout the world. And are no doubt others. , at this points two. questions arise in the mind of the casual non-letter-writing reader of science-fiction, who makes up, of 'bourse, the vast bulk of the field's paid circulation. First, why do these amateur newsmen do it? Why does Bob Tucker beat out his brains year after year in this strange manner? Profit? We are sure this is not the case. Tucker's letter is issued bimonthly and sells for #c a copy. He could make more money 'redecorating old bird houses. Vanity? Certainly not in the case of Wilson Tucker, who has written six novels -- five of which are oddly enough, ive yarns and only one a science-fiction story -- since and must be far more widely known for his fiction than his stf Personal satisfacopinion, is it. And for us, the second reader.: fan clubs? Pi writers in various Q. l which may enomenon of sciy see no the movehi  o. e ment unless to movie star stamp collectors segment of hobbyists In short, scienceto be a hobby with ing of sane, healthy-mindc who band the natural manner to cuss their mutual interests. In fact the principle error here is ir the term "science-fiction" to their particular field. While one the major cohesive forces relative to this hobby is the-' professional science-fiction magazine, many of the fen are thoroughly at home with the dry-as-dust higher mathematics, abstract equations, and technical data which have no place in magazines dedicated to pure entertainment and seldom appear there. An item noted in Tucker's newsletter informed us that a. stf fan wrote to a fairly well-known scientist named Einstein, received a reply, and that the fan's local club spent entire session digesting that reply.  said about the fringe" of stf fandom. B doubt, such a fringe exist " w a point that the Post ties last year banned a f; the mails, exists in almost enthusiasm, fanatic is far say the baseba vet to hear ff  Ksjt m a on V ing to start. Yet this "phenomenon" can be observed unfailingly every year in front of a world series stadium. In case the reader may interpret the foregoing as IF's invitation to the fan clubs into a mutual admiration society, it's not true, and we ask Bob Tucker and his clansmen to read further. As an individual, we admire them very much, but as editor of IF, a magazine dedicated to entertainment and thence to a publisher's profit, we can only quote the able Sam Merwin who with the following comment in the October '# I issue of that magazine : ",... fans as such make up a very small percentage of our net paid circulation . The magazine is achy a much less actively zealous and vociferous readership. Thus we have given the fans space in the deliberate hope and intention of making their antics entertaining to at least a fair proportion of the larger, less-fannish readership We did not see the foregoing reported in Tuckers newsletter. An oversight no doubt. But Bob certainly knows that Sam Merwin is a man who -- by his own admission -- considered "the trading of reasonably ingenious insults a delightful pastime". Therefore we think we could, with Sam's consent, substitute "their affairs interesting" for "their antics entertaining" in the above quotation. And with the substitution we've probably quoted from Sam, the policy of ninety-nine percent of the professional stf mag editors, although few of them have exhibited either Sam's courage or his desire to give up editing. Frankly, we don't think the fans need the pro mags as much as they appear to. We feel that if all paper supplies were suddenly needed to make blotters for the Pentagon and the pro mags thus ceased to be. Bob Tucker and his sciencefiction fans would go merrily on their way, getting together to discuss atom bombs, guided projectiles, space platforms and other things far beyond the layman's ken. Next Month s Personality: who has been called "The High-Priest of ScienceFiction." He rocketed Shaver to fame- -- gave the world the bitterly controversial Shaver Mystery. But how many people really know Palmer? Get the facts in the May issue of IF.   I t They opened the ruins to tourists at a dollar a head but they reckoned without... The met had his back toward back to her worrying. Swiftly she me. Hunched forward, he surveyed the crowd, but didn't find was screaming at the girl in the the person she was looking for. She lens of his camera. "Don't just started moving toward one of the stand there, Dotty! Move! Do arches that led deeper into the something! Back up toward that ruins, column with inscriptions on it... I followed her slowly. The girl was tall and longlegged She passed through the arch, with ideal body proportions, her stopped, and turned her head tofeatures and skin coloring a perfect ward the right, her eyes on somenorm-blend with no throwback thing out of sight. She'd found him, elements. Right now she seemed but she saw me at the same time confused and half-frightened as she and her worry deepened, tried to comply with the directions When she moved back into the of the man with the movie camera. crowd, I strolled casually through She smiled artificially, turned her the archway. head to look at the fragment of a There was a vaguely defined wall behind her, reached out with passageway, the roof over it gone lines of an almost obliterated inAnd twenty feet away, oblivious of scription in its stone surface. his surroundings except for what The camera stopped whirring. was directly in front of him, was Its owner straightened and grummy man. bled, "That's all." His height and build were somea J lit it worry. df my attype... well have in the types The rewas subtle. Only one ifferentiate would ever my attention take in his is elbows had a movements when his exploring hands paused so that  strange birdlike impression was given. Also an air of ungainliness in the lines of the lean body, rather than the feline smoothness and grace of the normblend. It was so in keeping with his features that it served to strengthen the psycho diagnosis. A throwback to an eraten thousand years in the past, and there ? as the textbooks say, prone to mental instability. It was no wonder that the girl called Dotty had had the air of being perpetually worried I e appeared now, from the far the ruin and approached "Ether than saw her ed up, every line of excitement.  ' 'Tve found it...f... #.  Tve # of years ago ruirts. I reto lies able to where the rock touched for five tl and find what I say is Dotty was "No, Herb. If it were might half believe you here on r a " pie weren't even humanoid! CZ XT t : I JJ TT I    I V... I mm A   W " Ufl mIt W L. m " Neither was I  hoarsely. I sighed regretfully. Fd seen too many cases like this one. F d grown to dread them. But it was a job and a man had to eat. tourists back to the bus. I min  gled with the crowd, and when Dotty and Herbclimbed .aboard I managed to stick close to them. "Where' d you two go to?" the man in the pith helmet called from where he was sitting. "Stick rmr close to me. I put a new role camera. At the next place J to get some shots of both "All right, p  e She ' and Herb find separate seats no talking, so I f studied the three man in the p was a normal f '# erb. You've t You'll talk ers so Ion  a Don't If this was a cemetery , the old Martians should have been here. But there iv ere no voices -- no hones   area in the ceiiter of the ancient city, the part considered too dangerous because of cave-in possibilities and made its way out to the edge of ruins to the part that resembled the ancient cemeteries on Earth. The only major difference was that there were no remains under the evenly spaced stones. There was some doubt that it had been a cemetery. But the guide announced it as one. And that announcement as the bus came to a stop Had a pronounced effect on Herb. He began his Buttery elbow movements again and looked afound at Dotty with a triumphant smile. I moved up quickly to keep him in earshot. He protested when George insisted on taking camera shots, then gave in and cooperated in order to get it over with. Finally George snapped his camera shut. Herb mumbled something to Dotty that I didn't catch, and started down one of the lanes between rows of stones as though headed for a definite goal. I ebtildrf t very well follow aftef they left the main group. It would have been obvious. Instead, I veered off to one side, gambling that when they reached their destination I would be able to read their lips. I got well away from stragglers and took out my mifrosebpe, pointing if off in the distance and swinging the objective lens around until it centered on them. I was lucky. They were facing in my direction. "It isn't a cemetery," Herb was saying with emphatic motions of his hands. "It was a parking area, and this stone was where I parked my air sled. I can remember it as though it were yesterday." . I had to admire the man's subconscious. It was a remarkably shrewd guess. The experts wouldn't play along with it, but they would probably never be able to prove him wrong on that count. But Dotty was arguing with him. "How can you prove it was a parking area?" Her eyes roamed over the Jarge field with its regularly spaced stones. "It certainly looks impractical for a parking lot." "Just the same, that's what it was. I wish I had a shovel here. I seem to remember burying something near my stone. If I could find that it would prove I really remember." "Why don't you forget it?" Dotty pleaded. "After all, even if it were true, hat docs it matter now ? # "It matters to me. Ever since we arrived here I've seen familiar things. Too familiar to be coincidence. I never felt this way before. I always considered reincarnation as ancient superstitious belief, just like everyone else. But not any more. I know. I lived here when all this was new." "But can't you just be satisfied to feel that you did and let it go at that?" Dotty asked. "I'm afraid of what they would doto you if they found out what you're thinking." "Hah!" Herb snorted. "I have a . f feeling that before we leave Mars I'll be able to prove it to them. Somewhere in this city' is something that only I know exists. It's hidden under stones that haven't been disturbed since man first set foot on  I  n.  'tixs. 'a O entirely clear -- it will come, listen. TheU what I say is y ? a.  ' ' S# see. up # c wont ng # ieve y v The guide was calling everyone back tothe bus. I watched Herb scowl fiercely at the stone marker that he believed to have been his, open Tis mouth to say something, then turn away sothat his lips were out of sight. Regretfully I put the mirroscope away and went back to the bus. JL mg next, and I was uneasy about it. Herb and Dotty managed to sit together and I got a place right behind them where I could eavesdrop. Rut they sat in silence. The bus had left the ancient city behind, to head out over the desert toward one of the few structures on Mars which had withstood the ravages of time without crumbling. An immense dome of solid concrete reinforced with, pure .copperrods Harder than steel. The Martians know what Earth civilization l t learn until around the year : thousand : that copper can t smpered, but pure copper fee's tempered of itself in a thou; dome was assageways ana vhich . were not would be a natwere pilini ly at the ecially a' trading and glittering like' tamisKefl gold. Two of the permanent guards had come out to take charge of the tour. I caught the eye of ode of them and nodded toward Herb. The guard caught my meamfig, edged over to his partner, and soon both men were warned that Herb was to be closely watched. I felt better, knowing that a couple of others knew about him. Maybe it would have been smarter to have taken him in .custody right then. But it would have meant a scene. The procedure of the tour was for the guide to do all the talking, leading the procession through the roped off parts of the dome, while the two guards followed along behind to make sure no stragglers got left. I let three or four people move in front of me so Herb woman' suspicious. Dotty wassticking to him, plainly worried. Arid hi more excited than he had bee any of. the other spots. He i quivered, his eyes caressing walls with a fevered look. Dotty didn't miss pered in her ear a The guide took into f a d walls, to  . V eri strait V s of desert and Then eve!, a zig-; rooms. ight of steps to eyes on the back of can tel! a lot by At first his head turned that, indicating he was was waiting for tale sudden tensing, with the head directed at some spot, that would tell of a sudden "memory" stirring in the man's mind. I almost missed it when it came, because it was between two passages -- a blank wall. The briefest pause, then Herb was going on again as though nothing had hapBut now his head had stopped its curiosity-motivated pivotings. It was the head of a man who was no longer curious -- who has made up his mind. about something. I didn't like it. And when the group emerged open air once more without Herb having tried anything I knew certainly as I had ever known that he intended comin and soon. station scrawled a hasty to investigate the between first level, and aem as I passed ig bus. other spots on no T TH once again leaving me free to Once there. I f were just setup in place to explore and promised to call me ; they were finished. Next C.L and made my report. it when the operator in, "Steve Merrit wants to you' she said crisply. "Make the circuit three way # I said. Steve's voice came in.  T had to get to you, Joe. This guy Herb and his wife just left the hotel # ' "C.I.'s listening too # I said... "Did they say anything that would point to where they're going?" "To the cemetery first. He swiped a couple of knives and forks when they finished eating their dinner. Maybe for weapons." "I doubt that # I said. " rv think it's time to pick him up. He's got to be committed." "Wait a minute  C.L you catch up with them, and play along. Tel! this you overheard him what was going on. fidence if you can. ,# s pretty plied. "That guy's "Ids orders  you lay the net : happens we can That was reluctantly, I put it back. I would have to play the part. The paralysis tube would give me away as an agent It would have to be up to Steve and the others to contain the threat. Down in the lobby I saw Steve waiting impatiently. He was uneasy, too. "What's come over C.I.?" They're toying with dynamite on this.' "I think I know what they want, they want to let him go far enough so we can see more of the nature of the danger. And I hope nobody gets killed. They should have spotted this Herb guy and not let him come here at all. I suspect they did spot him, and let him come to conduct another of their damned experiments. They don't want to leave well enough alone." We were outside now. No one was around. The sun was just beginning to set, and the instant it disappeared the night would be pitch-black. Even if one of the moons was out  "We'll be watching on the standard C.L band," Steve assured me. "They're at the temple right now, waiting for it to get dark." He grinned. "Good luck." There was a mixture of genuineness, half mctckery, and worry in his voice. At the temple ruins I found them easily enough and took the simplest course. I walked right up to them. "Hello," I said. "I thought I'd find you here. I want to go along with you. I'm interested." "What do you mean?" Herb was hostile and suspicious. "You remember me. I was on the tour this afternoon. I accidentally overheard you. It would he something if reincarnation could be proven." "Do you believe in reincarnation?" # I frowned as though being cautious. "I don't know." Then I put a disarming grin on my lips. "Since believing in it is legally classified as insanity, for the records, no." It was a nice statement. It could imply that I did, and Herb took that implication. He accepted me. Dotty was different. "How do you know he isn't an agent?" she asked Herb uneasily. "If I am. the fat's in the fire," I told her. "but wouldn't I be locking him up?" This quieted, but didn't satisfy her. "Anyway," I said, "if you can dig up something that you remember burying, an extra witness won't do any harm. That's what you're after, isn't it? Proof that will end the last bit of doubt?" "That's right," Herb said. "And you can help me dig." "Okay then," I said. And it was settled. We introduced ourselves, then lapsed into silence while we waited for the sun to set. It wasn't long. a cemetery than ever in the eerie glow of black light pencils as we made our way along a row of stone markers. Herb strode purposefully. Dotty stuck close to him, still a little suspicious of me. I trailed half a step behind. Finally Herb stopped beside one of the markers. "This is it," he said softly. I blinked at the marker then t atHerb. It wasn't the one he had singled out in the afternoon. Was he mixed up? If he was he was a good actor. He took out one of the dinner knives and squatted down and started to probe the soil, loosening it so that it could be scraped out by hand. I watched him dig. Part of the time I helped him. Wc found nothing. After a reasonable amount of this Herb stood up with a resigned sigh. "Guess i was wrong, I " he said. "Poor Herby," Dotty said. "Yeah, poor Herby," Herb said with every appearance of tiredness and defeat. "But -- that's that. Sorry to have gotten you all excited about nothing, Joe. Guess it was too much to expect anything." He turned to Dotty. "As long as we're out here, let's take a walk by ourselves. Huh?" That was as obvious a cue as I had ever been handed. Neat. I was confronted with the alternatives of scramming or calling him a liar. "Guess I might as well go back to the hotel," I said  cheerfully. "See you in the morning." I headed back the way we had corne until I was sure they couldn't hear me or see me with their black light pencils. Then, ducking down next to a marker I waited. After a couple of minutes I heard cautious foosteps. TPs me, joe -- Steve." "Good," I grunted. "What are they doing now? They gave me the brush-off." "I got the play," Steve said. "Slick. Should we close in now, or wait?" "I think I'll play my part a lit- tie fur ther. Don't want G.I. to think we're timid." "Okay," Steve said. "The next funeral we attend may be our own." "Yeah " I said. "It might." I moved into the darkness, not using my black light pencil, but keeping my sensitized glasses on so I could see Herb's if I got close enough. I reached the spot where we had done the digging. I hesitated, then kept on, toward the spot where Herb and Dotty had been so engrossed that afternoon. In my mind's eye I knew exactly where it was. My hands explored ahead of me, searching out each stone marker along my path, dinging to it as I passed it, and slipping off as I went on to the next. They were my only contact with reality in this total blackness. I was thinking, too. I was thinking of what Herb had said about this being a parking area for airsleds back before the earliest known records of man on Earth when this  f city was alive. He was probably right about it at that. Analysis had shown the presence of copper and aluminum in the top surface of some of the markers that could only be accounted for by some metallic object setting atop each one long ago, and remaining so that molecular and atomic creep could set in, carrying such atoms deep into the surface crystals of the stone. And I was wondering what it was he hoped to dig up. If it were f some sort of weapon it probably wouldn't work after all this time. It couldn't! Or could it? A few things had been pieced together about the ancient Martian civilization. Not much, but enough to be sure that they knew afew things we had never discovered. They had been masters at creating machines with no moving parts. The electronic devices we had found had proven they knew far more about V.H.F. than wc did. I could see what G.l. was aiming at now. We might not even recognize what Herb was searching for. It would be better to let him find it, and get it from him before he could use it. If it was a weapon. 'And it probably was a weapon. I was pretty sure his main objective was hidden in the wall in the dome, and that tills thing in the cemetery was something that would help him get to that abjective. My thoughts came back to my surroundings. I was less than a dozen feet from where Herb and Dotty should be. I stopped. There was no trace of black light. I held xnf breath and listened. And I heard the faint scraping of the knife against stone.  standard C.I. infrascope so that I could see. Steve probably knew more of what was going on than I did. I had counted on watching Herb by his own black light pencil, and he was working in darkness. Carefully I stole forward, inch by slow inch, my ears tuned for. the faintest significant sound such as a grunt of satisfaction that would tell of finding what he was digging for. me, thoughts about the latest discoveries in disintegration frequencies, thoughts about how little we knew of that ancient Martian civilization. But also I was figuring what Herb would do. He would find the object he was digging for. Unwittingly he would grunt his triumph. Dotty might forget his strict warnings to be quiet, and say something. Regardless of that, he would stand up slowly, fondling what he had found, remembering what it was and how it worked. There would be a few seconds before it would become a weapon in his hands, seconds that I had to make the most use of, and be ready for. c Uh!" It was the triumphant grunt I had known would come. Sudden panic made me cast aside whatever vague plan of action I had had. I turned on my pencil, bathing the two in its black light. At the same time I said, "I thought it was a scheme to get rid of me." It was the element of surprise that saved me. A still picture of the scene the black light disclosed etched itself into my mind. There was an object in Herb's hand. A strange, meaningless object, dirty, yet with definite form. It was cradled in his hand like a weapon. It was pointed almost at me. I dropped my pencil and went in low, diving for his legs. I felt the air crackle where I had just stood. As my antis encircled his legs I heard thunder exploding nearby. Training has its advantages. The moment I felt contact with Herb that training took over. I jerked and rolled in a movement calculated to throw him to the ground face down, the motion ending in a backbreaker hold. But only a part of my mind was concerned with that. The other part was frozen with horror. Approximately a half acre of the cemetery was glowing. I saw Steve in the center of it with Herb's weapon pointing his way. The very inertia of matter held Steve together for that brief instant, then he was falling apart, melting and evaporating at the same time, just like the stone markers and the ground around him. I had the thing away from him suddenly, and I wondered what to do next. Running footsteps gave me the answer. It was other C.I. agents closing in. Seconds later they had Herb under control. Dotty was wringing her hands and crying. Me, I was holding the tiling, afraid to let go of it and afraid to keep on holding it. But as the seconds passed without it exploding into destructive action again I began to let myself think I might live a while longer. The area of destruction was molten now. Its heat was like that of an open blast furnace. We skirted it and headed toward the road, lights in the distance telling us that cars were on the way to get us, I saw Dotty stumble. I took her arm. , She looked up at me, recognized me in the light from the glowing pool of bubbling lava, and tried to pull away. "Take it easy," I said gruffly. c Tm your friend. Maybe the only friend you've got here." Her look told me she didn't bed r lieve me, but she didn't pull away any more. We walked along, and after a moment she seemed to struggle up out of her mental paralysis. "Herb was right!" she said in a low, wondering tone. "He really did remember." "Itwas plain coincidence," I said sharply, "and don't ever let yourself think differently. He's insane. It's a recognized form of insanity. He'll be sent to a good mental hospital, and in a year or two he'll come out good as new." "Coincidence?" she echoed. Then she laughed. It was mirth that drifted quickly into hysterical hopelessness. I dug my fingers into her flesh until the pain brought her to her senses. "Coincidence," I said. "Nothing more. I've seen seventeen cases just like his. How else did I spot him? I recognized the type. None of the others found what they rationalized themselves into thinking they remembered from the time they were Martians. Eventually one of them would stumble onto something. That's coincidence. Not incarnated memory." She turned her head and blinked at me. I nodded grimly. "I'm an agent," I said. "I go out on the tours for one purpose only -- to spot psychos and make sure they don't get out of control You'd he surprised how many there are. Some of them, like your husband, probably show no sign of instability until they get here. They look around at the evidence of a civilization that existed before homo sapiens had evolved on the Earth, and it thtows them. If you want to understand more about it read the medical books. They get irrational pre-memories. They look at something and the idea of familiarity associates with the new impression. They look around a corner and see something, and build up the conviction that they had consciously known what was there before they looked around the corner." I felt that I was making headway with her. I wanted to. I had to. I "You -- you say there were others, and they didn't find anything?" she said. She was groping for something logical to grasp. I had to give bet that something. "That's right," I said. "And the law of averages said that someday someone would uncover something that's been missed." She was nodding slowly now, accepting what I was saying. It was authoritative. She would find com firm a,t ion in authoritative books. If she wanted to pursue the subject she would find plenty of evidence, real evidence, to support it. It is a common form of insanity. It was important that she believe that. We reached the road. C.I. had been prepared. There was a car to take her back to the hotel, a stationwagon for Herb who was now very, submissive and somewhat dazed, and a third car for me and the Science Building ba.seineiit, laying the thing on a wooden table, very gently. It seemed solid, each integral part of its form being of a different metal. None of the men watching me lay it down discounted the danger it contained. They knew too much about how shape and dimension can affect the electronic properties of metal. They knew the thing probably didn't contain an erg of power of its own, but probably triggered and directed the release of cosmic energies as yet unknown to them. They stared at it. One of them reached out to touch it, then slowly drew his finger back. I could see the decision crystallizing in their minds behind their serious eyes. This thing would go with the other strange and incomprehensible machines locked in vaults in a concrete building far out oh the Martian desert away from the tourist trails of this dead planet. It would remain there until the day when human science advanced far enough to understand it. "What about the wall in the dome?" I asked. "They roped it off. They're afraid of it." "Did you convince his wife he's insane ? # one of the science staff asked. I nodded. "I used the same old line. Told her there were dozens like him, and the law of averages made it certain at least one of diem would find something." He nodded, grinned without humor. "How we love to lie." I turned awav. There was a bitter taste in my mouth from all the lies Pd told -- all the bilge. But I knew the truth, too. I was as sure of that as I was of anything. It wasn't insanity, of course. And it wasn't reincarnation. It seemed to be, because the mind has a habit of possessing for its very own anything that enters it. The truth of the matter was that somehow, in some incomprehensible way, the Martians were still with us. They hated us and they knew how to use our weak ones. The old Martians -- and their science.' I took a last look at the weapon lying on the table, then left the room and climbed the stairs to the first floor, I walked down the silent, empty hall to the exit and out into the night. I let my eyes roam the blackness Aof the lifeless Martian desert. With an effort I pulled them away and fixed them on the warmth, the human warmth, beckoning from the hotel. I started walking toward that bit of comfort, and as I walked the eternal question that haunted all of us in C.I, hovered in the background of my thoughts. Would we be able to contain the Martiaps until we understood the terrible machines they had left as a deadly heritage? Tonight we almost hadn't... I thought of Steve.  :BS and planet rs! just what the latter are, the reader must imagine for himself, authors rarely describe them, but only disclose their effects. These weapons form a goodly part of ' the spacewarsciehce-fiction. That the former exists, and that' the latter is a very strong probability, are tilings which camiot be denied. But just whether they would be used, or how much use they would be are very doubtful factors. To permit their use on# must first of all admit the fact of idealis annihilating war. Personfind it hard to apply the istic to any war that has occurred in the murky past of manre is an one. ave certainly been fought pretexts, some o but in it Is possible to are foutid to that have past do not a lust for corn . enlijy traced to simple economic factors. The , Spanish empire of America, was based on more than a lust for gold, in those same Elizabethan days the English seaman was second to none -- but although often describe as Empire making, those seamen' instead of attempting to wrest from Spanish rule the Empire of South America went merrily ahead with the much more profitable, although equally deplorable, African slave ! And that even after they had defeated the Spanish Armada which had been sent against land, not from any real desire conquer the country, but simply spike the guns of the adventurer whose main source was pirated from. Spanish   India derives desire to conquer because with ... archy arid Civ cial  to prosper. Peace could only be obtained the price of conquest. Should your enemy be infringing on your trade, you do not destroy him utterly. You just try to break him down to your size, or a little beiow. You therefore not only make his markets open to you, but you make him one of your markets. Should lie have an eye on a bit of territory that will give him an advantage over you, then you try to annex it first. You don't wash it right off the map, for if it will give him an advantage, it will give you one also -- no matter how many excuses of liberation are made. That liberation yarn was one of Hitler's most-played records, and Joe is running him pretty close! In fairness, it must be admitted that we have our own version of the same story. It follows that internal use of the atom-bomb, except for race suicide, is not likely -- when everyone can use it. And it is probable that most of the leading figures in today's scene could put on a very nice display of atomic fireworks. Each race, creed, or nation, does not desire to . utterly destroy their enemies. They just desire an advantage -- economic -- over the rest. No advantage can be had when the others cease to exist. Although it may be nice politics to demand the use of the atom-bomb when you are not in favour of the present government, or administration is not likely that such demands are made seriously -- except in the public eye. If it were not that the public thought the use of the atom-bomb would be a decisive factor, the opposition would equally likely be expressing a strong desire that the government should refrain from its use. is doubtless considered fallacious by many of my readers -- tends to me to prove the use of the atom-bomb and the planet-smasher improbable in space-war. (As an aside, I consider space-war, as normally visualised, highly unlikely anyway. Anyone who has had much to do with the supply lines for a military campaign wall realise what I mean ) . Frankly, you may consider this editorial to be an iniquitous vilification of mankind. It is not meant to be. It is intended to show that man, in the main, does things because he hopes to get something out of it. You get. very little out of total devastation, if you are anywhere near the norm. The atom-bomb, fission-type, has been used twice, and although it's destructive powers did not quite match up to the science-fiction fan's expectations, it was enough of a holocaust to shock most humans. The fusion-type we expect to be far 'worse. I do not expect them to be used to any great extent in the future -- and I base my hope and expectation on man's very obvious cupidity! If that doesn't save us, nothing will! And, naturally, if it saves us long enough to permit us to get out into space, it will probably save all those planets that our authors of today so happily blast from their orbits into flaming; death. -- kfs Mfc X lil ft (VWhA# on TV today. We suspected this when we saw them do Ted Sturgeon's "The Sky Was Full of " Then we watched Tenn-s "Errand Boy'", and the classic, "Knock, by Frederick Brown and we said to ourselves, "Honey chile, this airit no coincidence, so let's prowl around and find out why. Sturgeon seemed the logical lad to quiz because we'd just sent Mm a fat check for his "Never M the very slick which you've no .ready read, .ockefeller Plaza, and asked how chap, Ted, who the high notes but here's what   Fiction League of America. The names Ted tossed off with pensive casualness were. Boucher, Asimov, Brown. Simak, Gold, Pratt, De Camp, Term. # # As good as any names yon cm find in the field T said master of understatement. The rest could be termed history, so let's term it history and get on. It seems this hard core of pure talent saw which wav the wind   blowing, got together, and tosse their collective stf classics into a hat. Then, as would natur lowp the TV brass mg up, co-axial cable. AI lead straight to The Sc "V "lie's most obtuse But the boys, sworn n dsle. len he sees it the ' moral here is substitutes."" Far many TV producers took one at science-fiction and Cassidy a ray gun. Sain Spade in a diver's helmet." ' The tried and true science-fiction fans could have told them how wrong they were at the very beginning; that stf isn't something any writer can bat out while waiting for the girl friend to straighten the seams in her stockings; that authors like Sturgeon, Temp and DeCamp didn't get up there by accident but by hard work and a sincere devotion to the highly specialized type of literature which is now taking its rightful place society of letters. J to # anyone amentals of dramust concede even in the great, will show up thd medium of it stage or is of a type tiorn it aim tenacity is f, a TV ort Abrahams ;ent named sells watch s good enterfiction stage ( passable, but goo your materia their field know how to  # it is the plot around in secure drama and suspense. # ingredients are there already ing to be used. It is eeive even a mediocre director making a botch of Nelson Bond's Trial Flight , as an exam And happily, the TV program, plagued with fuzzy minded technicians. The adaptations are skillfully done, the direction is smooth and obviously emanates from a practiced hand. The answer is quality right down the line -- a perfectly logical result. There is also another point of importance here to the true sciencefiction fan. Ours is a relatively new field of literature in that it is never before heard of it. Quite urally, we want science' a enter tairfment. makin ver on the so that whenotherwise. MO I new men as every time it screens. Let's and TV people, science outlet, make it and get the c  By Charles Recour # Phosphorescent Muscles I t is strange to consider the way in which altogether diverse scientific discoveries often dovetail. The old saying should be, "Science makes strange bedfellows! Biologists have for a long time been interested in the phenomenon of natural phosphorescence as exhibited by fireflies, deep-sea creatures and small animalcules found in fresh water. The mechanism all three types of life employ to change chemical energy into visible light is marvellously efficient. Practically no energy is lost in heat -- merely a fraction f one percent -- the rest appearing as useful light. One of the major objectives of the study of phosphorescence in fireflies was the acquisition of knowledge of the mechanism in order to improve upon the efficiency of fluorescent lamps and glow tubes. This study is still going on. But what is unique is that the scientists concerned are beginning to suspect that there is a link between the way phosphorescence occurs in living things and the way human muscles are triggered into action! Imagine the strange connection between these two (putatively) unrelated phenomena! It made in one branch of science will apply to another, entirely dissimilar, field. The study of the way the muscles act is of fundamental importance to anyone desiring any understanding of the life processes at all. Scientists have so far begun to get the glimmer of an idea as to how nerve actions are basically electrical, but the step from nerve impulse to muscle reaction has been a stumbling block for a long time. Now it appears that the study of fireflies is likely to suggest a lead to the right path. Insect World Can't Win T hat grimly poetic person who had "the insect crawling out of the eye-socket of the skull Of the last man on Earth' will have to change his tune soon. In the never-ending war between men and insects, it appears at last as though man is to get the upper hand. The insect world has countless numbers of soldiers, but the human world has brains. There is a famous laboratory in California devoted to one subjectinsects! It is small and underofteh happens that a discovery staffed, but it is efficient, and froth it have come a number of discoveries that will eventually influence all of our lives. Few pe'ople realize the destructiveness of insect pests. damage are done each year by insects to crops, textiles, even metals. And until the Berkeley Laboratory started a truly scientific campaign, all the chemical agents in the world were able to do no more than check their ravages. The Berkeley Laboratory is dedicated to the study of insect diseases. Insects, even as you and I, have a ferocious enemy in fungi aqd bacterial destroyers. Farmers, agronomists and scientists from all over the world have sent dead insects to Berkeley to determine what killed them. Frequently the lab is able to pinpoint the killer and very often it turns out to be a bacterium of some type or another. Fortunately the bacterial diseases that seem to destroy insects are not harmful to humans or animals -- and vice versa. This naturally led the lab men to consider wiping out insect pests with BW -- bacterial warfare. They first fought the alfalfa caterpillar with a filterable virus suspended in water and sprayed from an airplane. The results wereperfect and the caterpillars were wiped out in one fell swoop. Subsequent work has shown that viruses of various types are even more effective than bactericidal componds and, as a consequence, the electron microscope, the only medium through which viruses can be seen, is in constant use. Large varieties of viral substances have been discovered which are able to deplete the insect world, and right now a planned program is in progress, designed to practically label some virus as a destroyer for some insect type, definitely and specifically. The success of this program will be a great boon to farmers, beekeepers, plant and animal breeders, and even to householders. While in reality the threat of insect domination has always been very slight, tlie actual damage done by the creatures has been formidable. Chemicals have limited application and the best bet would seem to be to fight living fire with living fire -- use harmless viruses to combat fearful insects. Science is gradually turning from the manipulation of the physical environment, the inorganic, to the organic. In the biological world rather than the physical are the greatest chances for new and extreme advances. And BW against insects is one of the outstanding new victories ! Gassy Old Universe W hen you think of "deep space # , of the regions between the remotest stars and galaxies, you think of frightening emptiness, of sheer nothingness, awesome in its lack of matter. This is not exactly the case. So-called "empty space # is actually filled almost uniformly with vast amounts of plain old hydrogen gas. Near stars this gas is ionized, electrically' charged, and can be detected by ordinary telescopic and spectroscopic. observation. But neutral, un charged hydrogen cannot be de tec ted this way. It took the new science of "radio astronomy to show up the startling amounts of hydrogen present everywhere. First, neutral hydrogen makes its presence known by the unusual fact that every once in a while the electron spin of a single atom of .hydrogen will be completely reversed, and thus it will send out a feeble pulse of radiation -- not visible light, but the subtler radiation of familiar radio waves. Because this pulse is exceedingly weak, and because it occurs with such rarity in the life of a single hydrogen atom, there would be no hope at all of ever detecting it if it were not for the astounding fact that hydrogen is abundant beyond all expectation, m In. a universe measured in hundiameter, it is known that there is approximately one atom of hydrogen for every' cubic centimeter of space! This fantastic density explains why radio astronomy in this region works. Rarely does a single hydrogen atom pulse out a blast of radiation, but when countless numbers of atoms are involved, they all add up to an appreciable amount of radiation. Huge receptive directional antennas poke their grotesque shapes into the sky and, with highly sensitive fingers, pick up the twentyone-centimeter radiation that touches their sensitivity. Radio astronomy is now able to make charts and graphs of the radiation distribution. What it means is another matter. What part it plays in the structure of the universe is not fully known but, as has been mentioned before, it is very' likely that these enormous numbers of hydrogen atoms provide the fuel for warming the stars, and serve as a vast "coalpile" for the stellar furnaces. It is this discovery which leads scientists to think that the universe is not dying, but rather is in a continual state of creative flux, renewing itself and regenerating itself without end. Of course much more will be learned of these things as soon as Man can get out of the hampering blanket of air that interferes with such research and analysis. A Lunar observatory would be the thing that the average radio astronomer would sell his soul for for, without a three-hundredmile blanket of air to soak off the radio Waves before they touch his antenna he'd be able to tell a great deal more about what is happening away ! Architecture -- # jT pie are just emerging the Dark Ages! That is a little strong and exaggerated, but it must be remembered that, a mere twenty years ago, the height of architectural style was the imitation of Gothic horrors, or the duplication of the "California-Spanish # bungalow! Fortunately there has been a widespread increase in good taste stimulated by the superb desi; are cn # # f  ' beauty and utility without being imitative. , The use of materials such as glass and new synthetic media along with stainless metals and the combining of such structures into a natural relationship with their surroundings lead us to suspect that here is a glowing future in store for architecture. We can't extrapolate architectural designs to the year # but we can certainly visualize the trend they are taking and from that deduce that certain principles will be applied by future architects. The spreading-out of communities is a certainty. People will want then, as now,to take advantage of space and mobility. The skyscraper (which is now slowly dying as an architectural style) may have a new lease on life through the development of the helicopter and the wider use  of flying and moving in three dimensions which will be a surety of the time. As far as materials go, we can only suggest that # will have many as yet undreamed of by us. For example, it is almost a certainty that glass piping will be as common then as are iron and copper now. Many automatic machines just suggested now will be in use in both country life and city life. We may get some minor glimpse of what the future will be like by examining certain fine specimens of contemporary Californian architecture in which full use is made of the idea of relating outdoors to indoors in one complete "living-unit". People living in places like these are in harmony with their environment. Nature and Man have combined forces. The year # will see plenty of that, for by then Nature will have been completely tamed and function and aesthetics will be one. -- Charles Recour T he Amazing T rue Story of the Artist W bo Bilked World Art Authorities van Mcegeren, a master artist who, by artful completely fooling some of the world's great art experts!... It's only one of many unusual stories new magazine of true mystery. Ask your newsdealer!  hears again and again is "Where do you get youf plots?" Most authors, in self-defense have a stock answer they can toss of! subconsciously, but we've yet to hear one of these answers which is the least bit enlightening. Thinking in this vein, it occurred to us that a writer's correspondence concerning a current brain-child might throw at least a dim light on the subject. So here's a peek at some author-letters the postman brought us: Take the note we received from Ted Sturgeon who wrote "Never Underestimate." A story, incidentally, which has already been snapped up for a coming anthology. Ted writes: "The basic idea for this storv was an extension of known ideas -- extrapolation -- the choice of a solidly based scientific or social phenomena and a series of human narratives about their development. The electric motor evolves into the cyclotron which, logically, should produce an electron accelerator which operates in a straight line instead of a circle. Which is, of course, a driv for a space ship. Analytical chemistry has succeeded in synthesizing proteins, which logically leads to the creation of life in the laboratory and the evolution of man-made species suited to settle the outer planets."  (The Hell Ship) Palmer has to say about it : "Here it is. I think you will like it... "Keep every story tense with action and human interest and good characters the reader can believe in and you will keep him on the edge of his chair and safely in your hands, as a customer. He wants thrills and excitement. Strange things. Other worlds." Thus writes one of the acknowledged masters in the field. And so well put that we arc allowing Ray's Howard Browne, whose Twelve Times Zero left us a trifle breathless, wrote: "I've always wanted to put a modern cop into a situation whereby he is forced to cope with pure science-fiction with only his wits and native shrewdness to fall back on. I'll start the story immediately and Til be just as interested as anyone else in finding out what happens to him " Incidentally, the conversation from which we quoted iit our editorial came  at a later date after Howard's plot was prfcttv well formed. The Old Martians, Rog wrote: "I hope you'll like this one, Paul. It's somewhat of an experiment. I tried to do a problemstory with three possible solutions, any one of which the reader may take as his town. I hope I succeeded. If you don't feel that I did, please, by all means, shoot the yarn back." We should be so foolish! So there you have it. The inside dope right from the authors themselves.  Cometh is our letter department and we want some letters. We want to hear from you regardless of what you have to say, for your words serve as a sort of barometer on whether or not we're putting out a magazine you really like. For the best three letters received up through January #th, we're going to give three original manuscripts from the first issue of IF -- real collector's items. So send us your letters right away. Each one will receive careful consideration and if yours is one of the three best ones published you'll receive post haste your original manuscript. And, along with the three prize winners, we're going to publish as many letters as we have space to accommodate. Don't forget: if you want your letter considered for a prize it must be postmarked not later than January #th. (Remember: no matter vgkat you say, we promise not to sue you! ) tery. Here is one of the most unusual publications on the stands today -- a magazine devoted to the strange and mysterious, the bizarre and the baffling, stories you wouldn't believe in fiction but which actually happened in real life! Read! Prophet Without Honor, Mystery of the Bell Witch , The Mart Who Swindled Himself and others in the March issue of -- KWtol i Ask for it at your local newsstand ! a list of new and Lies, Westerns, ih entertainment, in cents a book -- five dollar! You can't coupon on next page! I MMli , pocket-size format, and unabridged novels it today! Take' your pick Money hack if not satisfied! by Adorn Ring, "ben Jim Pierce found the real story behind the simple little gold necklace, it was little wonder that so many people gambled their lives for it! Hard-boiled action! Mystery. where in the bloody strife of cattle war and range greed lay the secret of Burr Patton's other self, and he had to face strange people and hostile guns in order to discover it. Western. ' lonely country hotel a very cunliihg and ruthless murderer was weaving his web, and it was Boyd's fate to drive his girl and himself right into its quivering, terror-ridden heart...  Creepy. Mystery.  Trim, hard-bitten, Lawman Steve Rennevant meant to capture the Faro Kid dead or alive. But after of miles in the saddle, he fate had dealt him a hand. Western. by Lewis Graham. novel of Garr Fallconfidence man, love affair with and notorious brothel Love and AdDon Camexpose was beauty in a cottage were Lulie Warren wanted. But gorgeous child of the tenements damned by a fatal allure brought her heartbreak in j luxury. Romance. was talented, redheaded, beautiful, and a fine artist -- but her strange disappearance was shrouded by a maze of deception, fraud and murder! Mystery. Considine sided with the railroad, and found that he was fighting the girl he had fallen in love with who, by blood, was the railroad's most enemy. Western. Because they were smuggling Fraficisco to New York, Ed and Sylvia Furness faced thre sand miles of d angel wit on their heads. Mystery. aab .  Paul W, Fairmart he'd make Kit pay. And he did' her to his will, men, and beneath them. in blast Social#. TH IT y # rice had been a men -- most of , n one of one of them to murder her. Lynrs Westhad been an too long I to change, gun, on the side of an old friend in to the death. Western. Weston Clay. With ice on Ms head and a gun in his and, young Red Paine was forced take the same road his father had a one-way road to an unmarked grave in Root Hill ! Western. Levinson. Harry Witstow was sounding for oil, and in refusing to heed grim notes of warning that he move on, he was also sounding his own death, knell. Mystery. Bon Carson, ace newshound of the Chicago Globe , gave his city editor a fit and himself a poor life insurance risk when he turned a suicide into double murder. Mystery. wagon train in a eye Hopson. One day Clay ordinary cowpoke in lov the next day he was ning at bank after bank.  tington. Grinning, glitter in ous symbol of evil. An excitin story of sex, dope, blackmail murder in the lush Hawaiian Islands by a hard-hitting author. Mystery...histories of women, murdered in moments of passion by various means and for different reasons. By a famous police reporter. True mystery. If you do not agree that this is a big bargain in exciting reading, simply return the books within five (#) days and your money will be promptly returned in full. The coupon at right Is for your convenience. Merely encircle the numbers of the titles you wish, fill in and mail,. Enclose . check or money der. We pay postage and handling ' charges. Please check alternate titles. ish, we will ten books or # ;#.   for less  numbers I have encircled below. "I ene for five titles (# for ten titles or # #. If not satisfied, I may return within # days and receive my full. IT # #I II  # # li mand amazing experiences!  IhW cne ontore I Novor before have you seen a magazine with such fasciwritten especially by Amenrn't nutstnnding reporters, are the most battling and unusual, the most mysterious and strange true stones of all times. In the March issue. for instance, you'll be entenoincd the second" and his fobulcus nudut cult; thot did ent ond raised merry hell with story of an ingenious mogioan who knew some Ireks people never saw; ond many others . Ask your local news decler today for this "torrgletely foscinoting" magazine At oil newsstonds -- #c  Ail Stories New and Complete Publisher Editor IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., # Lord St., Buffalo, N. Y. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., Kingston, N. Y. Application for Entry as Second Class matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York, pending. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are ffction. Any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. #c a copy. Printed in U.S.A. A chat with the editor... ly called to my attention in which it was concluded that people' who can't get up in the morning, aren't necessarily lazy. I hailed the study with much personal gratification because I have always found it difficult to rise and shine with the morning sun. In fact, I am such a difficult case that I can quote ihy wife as follows: "Junior, it's time for breakfast. Go up and lead your father down the stairs lest he fall and break his neck." "Junior, show your father where his grapefruit is before he starves to death." After breakfast, I am always the last one up from the table, I sit thinking of all the logical reasons why I should drop dead, until my wife says, "Wake up and go to work, stupid, or you'll find your name scratched off the payroll." This dire possibility is usually effective, and I drag myself to the office, hoping the place has burned down. A round noon, things get better. I begin to breathe. My heart starts fluttering and gradually assumes an even, steady beat. By midafternoon I am in pretty good shape, and at quitting time, a no more bright nor alert individual can be found for miles around. Life becomes a great adventure; living a joy. About midnight, my peak of efficiency is reached. Then, around three A.M., comes a cry from the bedroom: "Get in here and get to bed, you nighthawk. You must have been born backwards." This accusation has always made me cringe. The onus of being a misfit has not been taken lightly. But now, along comes this blessed report, telling me I am not alone -- that there is a great suffering fraternity of which I have unknowingly been a member. people. Those who wake up early in the morning at the peak of their efficiency and run down gradually until bedtime. And their exact opposites, who start in low gear, advance to second, and come finally into high with every brain cell popping. In truth, the members of this unhappy clan are out of step with everyone else. But it is not a result of laziness nor habit. It has to do with the structure of their genes, and is as inherent as traits of disposition -- as Impossible to change as a cowlick -- as deeply rooted as a tendency toward baldness. The scientific report states that persons of this type should reverse their living cycle -- arise at sunset, when their efficiency is at its peak; retire when everyone else is going to work. Unfortunately the economic scheme forbids this to most of us. There aren't enough night jobs to go around, and those of us who commute would always find the trains running in the wrong direction. B ut science -- and not fiction- has come to our rescue. We aren't lazy and shiftless. We're just backwards, and we must wipe the stain from our good names. Sq arise. Children of the Night! Spread the word. The Club for Citizens in Reverse is now in the making. The first meeting will be in your editor's office at four A.M. tomorrow morning. something to be really proud of. When Ralph brought it in I took one look at it and got out the office bottle -- coke of course. We drank to the masterpiece and then my troubles started. With H. G. Wells not available, to whom could I assign the writing of the lead novel? A name flashed automatically. Milton Lesser, that dynamic young man with the magic typewriter. Milt arrived in response to ' a phone call and I showed him the cover. He said, "Gosh!" "I'd like a twenty-five thousand word novel that will do it justice." "What's your idea plotwise?" "You're the writer, not I." "But if it's a stinker it bounces," he mused. "How true." Milt went home and phoned that evening. "How do you like Tangle In The Sky?' " "It listens fine. Swell title." Milt stopped coming around for some weeks. Then one day he wandered in with a manuscript. I made a noise like an editor and asked, "Any rubber in it?" He grinned like a cat right after dinner and stalked out, leaving the manuscript in my hands. A couple of hours later I called him and said, "You forgot your check, genius. Want me to mail it?" I had just finished reading one of the best plotted, smoothest written, ably done space yarns anyone ever handed me. comment on the Ray Palmer article in this issue. It was one of the toughest jobs ever to come my way. Even the more so because Ray is one of my best friends, and th article had to be, above all, entirely objective. Did you ever try to write objectively about one of your best friends? It's not easy. But Ray is "copy" and the article was screaming to be written. And now that it's in print I can't even call Ray and say, "I was only fooling; chum." Because I wasn't. mail and how it was tossed at me in one great big lump. You see IF lives in Kingston, New York with Publisher Jim Quinn, but I'm located some fifty miles south in a Continued on page # The hunters wanted animals that lived on far Ganymede -- though not as badly as the animals wanted the hunters. Jungle in the Sky By Milton Lesser T he big man looked at home Steve of a Callistan fire-lizard. The among his trophies. Somehow big man might have been all of his scowl seemed as fierce as the them wrapped into one, Steve head of the Venusian swamptiger thought wryly, and there were a lot mounted on the wall behind him, of trophies. and there was something about his He was the famous Brody Carquick-darting eyes which reminded mical, and rumor had it he was the many richly mounted heads. "So you're fresh out of school with a degree in Extra-terrestrial zoology' Carmical grumbled. "Am I supposed to turn cartwheels?" Steve cleared his throat. "The Placement Service thought you might have a job -- " "I do, I do. That doesn't mean any young pup who comes along can fill it. Ever been off the Earth, Mr. Stedman?" "No." "Ever been off the North American continent?" "No." "But you want to go galavanting around the Solar System in search of big game. Tell me -- do you think they have a Harvard club on every stinking satellite you'll visit? Do you think you can eat beefsteak and drink martinis in every frontierworld dive? Let me tell you, Mr, Stedman, the answer is no." "Try me, sir. That's all I ask -- try me." "We're not running a school, Mr. Stedman. Either a man's got it or he hasn't. You haven't. Come back in ten years. Ship out around the Solar System the hard way, and maybe we can use you then -- if you still remember what you learned about Extra-terrestrial zoology. What in space ever made you study extra-zoo, anyway?" "I found it interesting," Steve said lamely. "Interesting? As a hobby, it's interesting. But as business, it's hard work, a lot of sweat, a lot of danger, squirming around on your soft belly in the muck and mud of a dozen worlds, that's what it is. Just how do you think Carmical Enterprises got where they are? Sweat and grief, Mr. Stedman." Carmical yawned hugely and popped a glob of chocolate into his mouth. His fat lips worked for a moment, then his Adam's apple bobbed up and down. Steve got up, paced back and forth in front of the desk. "I won't take no for an answer, Mn Carmical." "Eh? What's that? I could have you thrown out of here." "You won't," Steve told him calmly. "Maybe I'm just what the doctor ordered, but you'll never know until you try me. So -- "So nothing! I said this isn't a school." "They tell me the G or dak leaves on a ten-world junket tomorrow. All I ask is this: let me ship along as the zoology man. Then, if you're not satisfied, you can leave me at your first port-of-call -- without pay." Carmical smiled triumphantly. "You know where we space out for first, Mr. Stedman? Mercury, that's where. I'd love to see a sassy young pup like you set loose on Mercury in one of the Twilight Cities." "Is it a deal?" "It sure is, Stedman. It sure is! But I warn you, we'll expect perfection. You'll not have a chance to profit from your own mistakes. You won't have a chance to make mistakes. One slip and you've had it, is that understood?" "Yes." "Pm not going, of course," Carmical said, patting his great paunch and saying with the action that he was too old and too fat for space; "But Til hear all about the way you were stranded on Mercury, among a lot of Merkies and -- Steve smiled grimly, said: "No you won't. Next time you see me will be after the tenworld junket. Whom do I ask for on the Gordak? Carmical dialed for a bromo, watched it fizz in the glass, drank it, belched. "T. J. Moore's in charge," he told Steve. "Old T. J.'s a mighty rough taskmaster, Stedman. Don't say you weren't warned." "Thanks." "Well, I'll hear about how you were stranded on Mercury," Carmical predicted. "You'll see me after the tenworld junket," said Steve, and closed the door softly behind him the great jet-slagged underside of the Gordak, spraying fresh zircalloy in the aft tubes. Spaceport officers were everywhere in their crisp white uniforms, checking cargo, giving terse directives to the crew of the Gordaky lounging importantly at the foot of the gangplank. "Name?" one of them snapped at Steve. "Stedman." The man flipped through a list of the expedition's members. "Stedman, huh? I don't see -- oh, hererit is, in pencil at the bottom. Last minute addition, huh Stedman?" "Something like that," Steve admitted. "Well, climb aboard." And ffien Steve was walking up the gangplank and into the cool metal interior of the Gordak. His palms were clammy, and he wondered if any of the crewmen within the ship noticed the sweat beading his forehead. He'd managed to come this far with a surprising degree of objectivity, and only now did reaction set in, causing his heart to beat fiercely and his limbs to grow weak. That T. . Moore must have been spawned in hell Charlie had said -- and now Charlie was dead. Because of T. J. Moore? Indirectly, perhaps, but T. J. Moore was responsible. Or, if you looked at it on a different level, the cutthroat competition between Carmical Enterprises and Barling Brothers Interplanetary was to blame. It didn't matter, not really. Charlie was dead. That alone mattered. A big man with incredibly broad shoulders, hair the color of flame and a florid face to match it, came stalking down the companionway. Steve said, "I wonder if you know where I can find T. J. Moore." The giant smiled. "You crew or expedition?" "Expedition," said Steve, extending his hand. "Steve Stedman's my name," The hand that gripped his was hard and calloused. "I'm Keyin McCann, boy. Sort of a liaison man between the crew and the expedition, only they call me the Exec to make everything official. Better take some advice -- don't look for T. J. now. T. J.'s busy doing last minute things, and T. J. hates to be disturbed. Why don't you wait till after Brennschluss when we're out in space?" "It can't wait. I've got to see that Moore knows I'm aboard and under what conditions, because I don': want to be thrown off this ship at the space-station. If Moore doesn't like the conditions, Mr. Carinical can be called. But after we blast off it'll be too late." Keyin McGann shrugged. "It's only advice I gave you, boy. You'll find T. J. down on the third level looking over the cargo holds. Good luck." And McGann took a pipe from his pocket, tamping it full, lighting it and staring with frank, speculative curiosity at Steve. "Stedman, eh?" he mused. "The name's familiar." "You think about it," said Steve, and made his way toward the third level. Perhaps some of them aboard the Gordak had known Charlie, and McGann, being the Exec, must have been around a long time. The third was the lowest level of the Gordak:, or that part of the ship nearest the tubes with the exception of the fission-room itself. Here on the third level were the cages which, in the months that followed, would hold the big game brought within the Gordak. But the word cage, Steve realized, can be misleading. A rectangular enclosure, its wall composed of evenly spaced bars -- that's a cage. But the bubble-cages of the Gordak were something else again ; precisely as the name implied, they were huge bubbles of plastic, complete with remote-controlled airlocks. You could pump in any kind of atmosphere, from Jupiter's lethal methane-ammonia mixture to the thin, oxygen-starved air of Mars, and under any desired pressure, too. And now on the third level a battery of experts was busy checking the bubble-cages for defects, since a leak after some noxious gas had been pumped into one of the bubbles could mean death for everyone aboard the Gordak. Steve stood there nervously  for what seemed a long while. He let his gaze rove up and down the third level, but he only saw the coverallclad technicians checking the bubble-cages. Kevin McGann had said he could find Moore here, but unless Moore zipped on a pair of coveralls himself and joined in the work -- which certainly seemed unlikely -- then Moore wasn't around. shoulder. Startled, he whirled around. A woman stood there, just behind him, staring at him insolently. She was tall, as tall as Steve himself, with her close-cropped blond hair peeking out around the edges of a black cap. She wore what looked to Steve like a glossy black Martian sand-cape which she let fall straight down behind her so that it almost brushed the floor. Under it, she wore a brief pair of shorts, also black, and a halter. She was muscular in that lithe, feminine way which had grown so popular in the twenty-second century -- the century which had finally seen women come abreast of men in all sporting activities and surpass them in some which required special grace and lithe-limbed skill. "I hope you found whatever you're looking for," she said. She spoke with a complete lack of warmth which startled Steve for the second time in a few moments. She was a beautiful woman, he realized, but she looked so completely incongruous among the coveralled men that Steve found  himself whistling softly. 'T never expected to find a girl here," he admitted. "Not on this expedition." "What's the matter, are you old fashioned? This is the twenty-second century, the enlightened century, remember? There's nothing a girl can't do if she sets her mind to it. A recent survey shows that forty-percent of the homemakers in the U.S.N.A. are men, sixty percent women. Okay, it's only logical that some of the remaining forty percent of females have some tough jobs, too." "I read the books of the feminist movement," Steve assured her. "But it's going to take a lot to convince me of that. Me and a lot of other people, I suspect." "Is that so, Mr. Smart-guy? Are you a member of the expedition?" "Yes." "Well, anytime you want to hustle down to the gym with me and go a few rounds, let me know." "Are you serious?" "Of course I'm serious." "Well," Steve said, deciding to change the subject and feeling utterly ridiculous about the whole conversation, "let's forget it. I was looking for T. J. Moore." The woman smiled coldly. "That's me. I'm T. J. What do you want?" "I -- uh -- what? You're T. J.? You -- a girl?" "Will you please hurry with whatever you want to tell me? I haven't got all day." "My name's Stedman." Steve felt his composure returning. The fact that T. J. Moore was a woman didn't make any difference. But unconsciously, Steve regarded her as a member of the weaker sex, and a large chunk of her fearsome reputation vanished because of it. "I wondej: if Mr. Carmical contacted you -- "He sure did, Stedman." "Good, then we can -- "Maybe you think it's good. I think it stinks. Listen, Stedman, maybe you think you can pull the wool over my eyes like you did over Brody Carmical -- but you can't. He didn't recognize you.r name, I did. No kid brother of Charlie Stedman's going to make trouble for me because he thinks I was responsible for his brother's death." "I didn't say -- " "You didn't have to say. I can see it in your face. But get this straight, Stedman. Your brother died op Ganymede three years ago -- of natural causes, that is, if you can call some of the local fauna 'natural causes'. He worked for Barling Brothers Interplanetary, so I guess the rivalry between them and us didn't help. But no one killed him." "I didn't say -- " "Is that all you can say, 'you didn't say?' Try to tell me why you came aboard the Gordak; go ahead, try." "I'm an expert in Extra-terrestrial zoology, and you needed one. Mr. Carmical hired me." "I know that. 'But I guess I also know a thing or'wo which Brody Carmical doesn't. All right, Stedman. You come as far as Mercury. But one slip, just one slip -- " "Okay, T. J.," Steve said, almost jauntily. "I'll watch my step." "I'm the Gordaks ctain. You'll call me that. Captain -- is it clear?" "No," said Steve, and laughed. The ten-world junket would be a hard, driving, gruelling ordeal come what might, and he wouldn't kowtow to T. J. Moore, male or female, here at the beginning. "No," he said again, forcing the laughter out. "This isn't a military ship, so you won't impose any arbitrary dis' cipline on me." The woman laughed too, but it was more effective. "I won't, won't I? Once we leave Earth, Stedman, everythirig we do is dangerous. ' Everything. I've got to have full authority, every order obeyed at the drop of a hat. Understand?" "No." The woman removed the black cap from her head, and Steve no ticed, not without surprise, that hr pale blond hair wasn't closecropped after all. It had been piled up inside the cap, and now it spilled down loosely about her shoulders. Smiling, she dropped the cap to the floor. "Pick it up," she said. "Are you kidding? I'm an expert on Extra-terrestrial zoology. That's what Mr. Carmical hired me for. If you want that hat picked up, better do it yourself," Vaguely, Steve wondered if Charlie had met the woman those final days on far Ganymede, had fought with her tooth and nail for some priceless specimen -- and lost, with no witness but the bleak, desolate topography of the Jovian moon. The woman turned away from him, called: "LeClarc! LeClarc, come here." ures approached them, a thickthe wed man whose muscular strength couldn't be hidden by the baggy clothing. Not as tall as Steve or the woman, he was broad of shoulder and thick through the . chest. He had a dark face and deep-set black eyes, and a thin scar ran the length of his fight cheek, from eye to chin. "Yes, Captain?" "Stedman here is new. He questions my authority. I wondered if you'd like to work him over some -- " "A pleasure," growled the stocky, gnarled Frenchman, arid swung his right fist up ill a quick, blurring motion. Steve didn't have time to parry it. The blow caught him flush on the mouth and jarred his teeth, sent him crashing back; against the wall where he slid down slowly until he was sitting on the floor. Groggily, he got to his feet, wiping his bloody lips with the fingers of one hand. LeClarc, chuckling, hit him once more before he could quite pull himself together. The right hand slammed against his stomach this time, driving the wind from his lungs. He started to fall, but he clawed at LeClarc's middle as he went down, and held on. Still chuckling, LeClarc cuffed him about the ears almost playfully, but the openpalmed blows stung him and sent wild rage coursing through his blood. Clearly, that was the idea. LeClarc was enjoying himself -- but LeClarc wanted him to fight back. Steve got a hand up in front of his body, palm up, and drove it against the Frenchman's chin. He felt the neck snap back sharply, heard the sudden click as LeClarc's teeth met with savage force. Bellowing, the Frenchman came at him again, fighting southpaw and bringing a roundhouse left from back behind his body. But Steve's wind had returned and now he sobbed air in great gulps. He ducked the wild swing and found the Frenchman wideopen, pounded lefts and rights to the man's midsection. LeClarc, stunned now, brought his guard down. Steve was in no hurry. He chased the dazed LeClarc around an ever-widening circle, was dimly aware that the other technicians had stopped their work to watch. He jabbed with his left hand, covering the olive face with purple welts. He held the right cocked but did not throw it. Soon, though, he could hear the other technicians -- who probably liked a good brawl ; -- muttering. The idea, as they saw it, wasn't to cut LeClarc up completely but instead, to win swiftly. Shrugging, Steve realized that the anger he felt for the woman had blinded him, and after that, he unleashed his right hand, felt the searing contact with LeClarc's jaw, saw a couple of teeth clatter off the wall as the Frenchman's mouth flew open. Sagging first at the knees, then the waist, LeClarc fell to the floor and huddled there inertly. Steve turned to the woman, spoke out of fastswelling lips. "You're the Captain and I only work here. Tee jay," he made the initials sound like a name. "So I'll take your orders -- provided they make sense. That one about the cap didn't. If you want it picked up, you'd better stoop for it yourself." Not looking back, he climbed the stairs toward the second level, wiping his bloody lips with a handkerchief. showed him around the Got dak after Brennschluss. Newton's second law of motion carried the ship forward through the near-vacuum of space now, and it would continue that way, plowing ahead at seven miles per second until it was caught and slowed by the space-station's gravity. There the bunkers would be reloaded with slow-fission plutonium for the long dash sunward to Mercury. "... and through there you'll find the fission-room," Kevin was saying. "That's about the size of it, boy. But I warn you to keep away from the fission-room long as that red light is blinking. Everything inside gets pretty hot, and there's enough radiation to kill an army unless the shields are up. Even then, I'd recommend a vac-suit." "I'll remember that," Steve said, lighting a cigarette. "Word gets around a ship like the Gordak pretty fast. I didn't see your fight with LeClarc, but I sure heard enough about it. There's only one man aboard ship who can beat the Frenchman in a fair fight, and -- " "You?" Steve wanted to know. But it was hardly a question. It looked to him like Kevin could take on two LeClarcs with no trouble at all. "Yes, boy. Me. But now there are two of us, and you've made yourself an enemy. LeClarc doesn't forget easy, so you'd better be on your guard." "I'll remember that, too," said Steve, laughing. "But it looks like you keep warning me about something all the time, Kevin. Why?" "You're Charlie Stedman's kid brother, aren't you?" "Yeah. Yeah, but how did -- " "How did I know, boy? It's written all over your face, and Charlie may have been with Barling Interplanetary, but a lot of us knew him. Charlie was the best, boy." "Thanks. Kevin, how did Charlie die?" The giant shrugged eloquently. "I don't know. It was T. J. who found him out on Ganymede. She was out tracking an anthrovac, and you don't track anthrovacs in crowds. Well, it seems Charlie had landed for Barling, and Charlie had the same idea." "He never told me Teejay was a woman, but he said once she must have been reared in hell." Again, Kevin shrugged. "It's open to question, boy. I don't like T. J., but I like working for her. You take a man like LeClarc, he'll die for T. J. All she'd have to do is ask him, and he'd die. You see, boy, big game hunters don't come any smarter. Trouble is, T. J. knows it and flaunts it. Also, she's a woman but she's strong as a man and knows that, too. She dares you to fight her every step of the way, and it takes a big man to -- " "I thought you said Charlie was the best!" "And I still do. But a man's got to have some flaws. Maybe he couldn't take T. J. and had to let her know. The same thing happened to you, after only five minutes. The gals have won their spurs in every field which was strictly masculine a hundred years ago. Men tend to resent that, especially when a talented woman like T. J. let's them know it, and no bones about it. So, that's T. J." "Yeah," said Steve, frowning. "That's Teejay." "What's the trouble, boy?" "I've got to find out what happened to Charlie, that's all. But Tee jay's going to be a problem." "The grandmother of all problems, you mean. With all of that, though, she can still be all female when she wants to be. Maybe Charlie fell for her -- " "Charlie falling for that cheap, no good -- " "Careful, boy. She's my Captain, and a good one. I wouldn't ship out on the Gordak if I didn't think so. Careful." Then Kevin smiled. "You'll learn, in time. Anyway, Charlie was a good-looker and attractive to the girls, he was romantic -- so maybe T. J. fell for him, too. Then they had a parting of the ways and -- "Sure!" Steve exploded. "Sure, they fell in love or something only Charlie forgot to mention in any of his letters she was a woman. You're barking up the wrong tree, Kevin." "Maybe. Maybe not. I'jn only talking off the top of my head, boy. But it's worth considering." Kevin jabbed a thick finger against his calloused palm. "What I'm getting at is this, whether they made love or not, I don't think T. J. would kill anyone out of cold blood." "I'll think about it," said Steve, and then a whistle shrilled through the length of the ship. They were nearing the space-station, half as far from Earth as Luna, and deceleration came upon them gradually and would continue to increase until they all had to bed down in the accel-hammocks for landing. U nexpec tedly , T eej ay herself was checking in the members of the expedition as their two-hour stop over at the station drew to an end. As he approached her along the gangplank, Steve looked down and saw the station-men wheeling the small but tremendously lavy plutonium bunkers under the ship, each compact unit weighing a couple of tons with its concrete shielding"Well, Stedman," said the woman, the broad black sand-cape wrapped around her completely now, as if only the members of her crew had the right to see what lay beneath it, "I see you've never watched a ship getting ready for blast off." "That's right," Steve admitted. "First trip out." "You want some pretty sound advice? I'd suggest you stay here at the station and wait for the first Earthbound ship." "Thanks," said Steve. "But Mr. Carmical hired me at least as far as Mercury, so that's where I'm going." Tee jay grinned. "You're a plucky kid, Stedman. All right, Mercury it is -- but LeClarc can do the honors when it's time to see you off the Gordak for good. He doesn't exactly like you, Stedman." "I've been told that." "All ight, move along. There's a whole line of men I've got to check in behind you." A plucky kid, Steve thought, and laughed. She'd called him that, although he knew she'd probably have a hard time matching his twenty-five years. Well, she'd spent her life in space and on the frontier worlds. Maybe that did make a difference. Five minutes later, they blasted clear of the space-station on an orbit that would intersect the Mercurian ellipse at perihelion... From there, the Gordak would visit Venus, Mars, the planetoid Ceres, the four large Jovian moons. Titan and Uranus. Ten worlds in all the hunters would touch on -- and each world would offer up its native fauna for the Brody Carmical Circus, Steve wondered if there'd be' trouble with Barling Brothers Interplanetary. There generally was. But then he smiled without mirth, for the chances were he'd never get beyond the first landing on Mercury, anyway. Gordald' crew and another thirty-odd in the expedition, and a space ship being the complicated, labyrinthine device that it is, it wasn't too strange that Steve failed to encounter LeClarc until immediately before landing on Mercury. Then the Gordak's deceleration tubes had cut in and Steve found the most readily available accel-hammock in the general lounge. The Frenchman was stretched out on the cushions three feet from him. LeClarc said, "This will be a terrible, hot place." 'T know. At perihelion, Mei cury's not much more than thirty Frenchman wanted to bury the hatchet, fine. LeClarc strained to raise himself on his elbows against the increasing deceleration. "Sure," he said, "a hot place. After you foul up, Stedman, my vote will be to leave you on the hot side ihstead of giving you passage to the twilight zone." The Frenchman was being illogical and pointlessly childish. "I didn't ask you to fight with me," Steve told him. "Why don't we forget all about it?" "If you want to, forget. I, LeClarc, never forget." "By space, LeClarc -- " the voice came from the other side of the lounge -- then you're a spoiled little child." It was the big Exec officer who spoke, Kevin McCann. LeClarc did not answer. Kevin winked at Steve, then set his face grimly against the bone-crushing deceleration. Fifteen minutes later, they landed at Furnacetown. The names of the new frontier settlements, Steve thought with a grin, were as picturesque as the names of the old Wild West towns. There was a . huge, priceless matrix of ruby far below the surface near Furnacetown, and the frontier settlement existed to mine from it. But the place was named aptly, for here on the hot side of Mercury, the temperature was hot enough to melt tin and lead. A community of half a thousand hearty souls, Furnacetown shielded itself from the swollen, never-setting , sun with a vacuum-insulated dome worth of cooling equipment. Even so, the atmosphere within the dome was a lot like New Orleans on a sultry summer day. The mayor of the town, a man named Powlaski, met them at the landing field. "It's hot," said Teejay, offering her hand and shaking with the plump official, man-fashion, "It's always hot. Captain Moore. At any rate, be happy that you've beaten Barling here this time." "Oh, did we? Good. Wenineed three asbestos suits, Powlaski. I never did trust plain vac-suits on the sunward side of this boiling mess of a planet. Say, has anyone got a cool drink? I'm roasting." Someone wheeled out a portable refrigerator and the synthetic ginand-orange stored therein tasted to Steve's thirsty lips almost like the real thing. Then LeClarc, who had ventured into one of the squat buildings with Powlaski's lieutenant, a middle-aged woman, returned with three heavy asbestos suits draped ponderously over his arm. Their combined weight was perhaps two hundred pounds, but it became negligible under Mercurys weak gravity. "We're ready' he said, extending one of the suits to Teejay and helping her slip it on over her shorts and halter. This was the first time that Steve had ever seen her without the black cape, which seemed a sort of aflfected trade-mark. "Three suits?" Steve demanded. "What for?" "The third one's for you, Stedman," the woman told him. "I know your job is to see that the game stays alive in our bubblecages, but I don't think it would hurt if you had a look-see at the stone worm in its own environment." "That's not what I meant," Steve told her. "Why LeClarc?" Teejay shrugged, zipping up the suit. "Because I said so, that's why. Also, LeClarc's something of an expert on the inner planets and he goes wherever I do, anyway." "Sort of a bodyguard," the Frenchman purred, strapping a neutron gun to the belt of his asbestos suit. "Hey, who's got those helmets?" And then Steve felt them slipping the thick, clumsy helmet over his head. Kevin stood nearby and the Exec looked like he wanted to say something, but Steve's helmet had snapped into place and from that point he could only talk by radio -- and over the crackling interference of the swollen sun at that. Moments later, he'd stepped through an airlock at the side of the Fumacetown dome and plodded out on the surface of Mercury. soupy atmosphere and the verdant tropical jungles. On Mars, the rusty desert and the ruins of an eon-old civilization. But on Mercury you knew at once that you trod upon an alien world. At perihelion, the sun swelled to almost four times its size as seen from Earth, and because Mercury's tenuous atmosphere had boiled off into sky was black. The sun had lost its spherical shape, too. Great solar prominences licked out at the blackness, and the visible corona seemed to swell and pulse. Underfoot, Steve could feel the crunchy ground powdering beneath his asbestos boots with every step. And far off toward the horizon, a jagged ridge of blood-red mountains bit at the black sky like festering, toothless gums. Before long, Tee jay's voice sang in Steve's earphones. "Over here, you boys." And Steve could see her crouching, shapeless in the loose asbestos suit, off to his left. The sun's heat had parched a long, snaking crack in the surface and Steve lumbered over to it clumsily, letting his shadow fall across the crevice. "Those stone worms are umbra-tropic," he called, and waited. "I don't wonder," said Teejay, looking up at the sun through the smoked goggles of her helmet. The stone worms, Steve knew, were attracted by darkness -- hence they generally dwelled in the deepest crevices, although a man's shadow might bring them to the surface. He'd never seen a stone worm, but he'd read about them and seen their pictures. "You'll see something very unlovely," Teejay predicated. "The stone worm isn't a carbon-basic animal, but a silicate creature with a sodium-silicon-nitrogen economy. It's about four feet long and kind of like some ghastly white slug. It -- hey, Stedman, get on your toes!" The worm was coming. It poked its head up out of the crevice first, and then the slug-like body followed, curling quite instinctively until the whole thing lay in Steve's shadow. Four feet long and a foot across at tlte middle it looked like the product of nightmare. The head was one huge, lidless, glassy eye -- with a purple-lipped mouth where the pupil should have been I The mouth opened and shut like that of a fish, but when Steve lifted the monster by its middle and brought it out into the sun, the lips puckered completely shut and the white slug began to thrash dangerously. But under the influence of the sun's heat it soon subsided. Trouble was, Steve thought vaguely as they made their way back toward Furnacetown with the quiescent monster, the sun's heat did not subside. Probably, it was his imagination, but the sun had seemed to become, if anything, stronger. He looked at the others, but they merely walked forward, completely unconcerned. Maybe he'd tired himself subduing the stone worm, for he knew that might seem to intensify the heat. Inside his asbestos suit, Steve began to sweat. It did not start slowly, but all at once the perspiration streamed down his face and body. It was then that his left leg began to bum. Down below the knee it was, a knife-edged burning sensation which became worse with each passing second. Someone had heated a knife white-hot, had applied its sharp point to the nerveendings of his leg -- and then twisted. It felt like that.  Screaming hoarsely, Steve fell, watched through burning eyes as the stone worm commenced crawling laboriously away. Itwas LeGlarc who went after the worm and retrieved it, but Teejay knelt at Steve's side and, surprisingly, real concern was in her voice when it came over the radio. "What's the trouble, Stedman?" "I don't know," Steve gritted. "I'm hot all over -- and my leg feels like it's on fire. Yeah, right there -- owl -- go easy!" Teejay frowned or at least Steve guessed she frowned by the way she spoke. "There's nothing much we can do about it, Stedman. Seerns to be a hole -- just a pinprick, but a hole -- in the asbestos. It's a wonder you weren't screaming bloody murder before this. How's the air?" It was getting hard to breathe, Steve realized, but dimly, for his senses wereReceding into a fog of half-consciousness. Something hissed in his ears and he knew Teejay had turned the outside dial of his air-pump all the way over. It made him feel momentarily better, but the pain still cut into his leg. "I've got the worm," said LeClarc. "But what happened to him?" He asked thfe question innocently -- too innocently. Teejay didn't answer. Instead: "Can vou walk, Stedman?" "I -- I don't think so." "Then I'll carry you. But remember this: if we get you back all right, you can thank the twentysecond century feminist movement. Gan you picture an old-fashioned gal slinging a man over her shoulder and toting him away to safety like a sack of grain? Here we go." And she got her arms under Steve's shoulder, tugging him upright and swinging him across her back in a fireman's carry. He felt in no mood to question her motive, but he could sense the triumph in her as if she had said, "See, I'm as strong, as a man, and don't you forget it." In spite of himself, he couldn't help responding to the unspoken challenge. "Sure," he said, "I can thank the feminist movement, but more than that I can thank Mercury's light gravity, Teejay. We're lucky I don't weigh more than fifty pounds here." An hour later they arrived back at Furnace town, buf by then Steve was unconscious from the pain. X X boy?" It was Kevin Me- Gann, the battered, unlit pipe clamped tightly between his teeth as he spoke. Steve sat propped up in a bed in the Gordaks infirmary, his left leg wrapped in bandages from knee to ankle. "Pretty good, I guess. Kind of weak, but there's no pain." "You're lucky the Captain got you back here in time. Four inches of your calf was cooked third degree, but she carried you back here soon enough to cut it away before deep decomposition, and spray on syntheplasm. You'll be as good as new in a week, and no scar, either. Thanks to the Captain, boy." "Yeah," Steve admitted. "Sure. But what I want to know is this: hOw did it happen?" Kevin shrugged his massive shoulders. "I won't make any accusations, boy, not without positive proof. But I took the liberty to examine your suit, and it looked to me like someone had punctured a small hole almost all the way through. The heat did the rest." "You mean LeClarc?"  "I never said that. But LeClarc was the one who got the suits, so he -- more than anyone -- was in a position to do something like that. Further than that I won't carry it. This is not an accusation." "Suits me," Steve told him. "And thanks, Kevin. But after this, Frenchie had better watch his step. Are we out in space again?" "Yes. Passed Brennschluss fortyeight hours ago." "What?" "Sure. They had you doped up for two days, till the syntheplasm had a chance to set." "How soon can I get out of bed?" "Depends. If you don't mind hobbling around on crutches, today probably. If you want to wait till you can walk, four or five days. What's your hurry, boy?" "I've got to take care of that stone worm, remember?" "Say, that's right! No one knew what to do, so they suspended it in a deep freeze until you could go to" work. A hideous brute, I might add' "Will you ask the doctor to give me some crutches? Swell. First, though, I'd like a good meal. And listen, Kevin -- I guess Tee jay saved my life, at that. Want to tell her I'd like to see her?" "Of course," said Kevin, and left the whitewalled infirmary, grinning from ear to ear. By the? time Teejay arrived, Steve was eating his first solid meal in two days. "Hello," he said. He almost found himself adding, "Captain" -- but he checked the impulse just in time, "McCann tells me you're ready to get to work today." "That's right." "Good. That stone worm won't stay in ice indefinitely -- not when it lives on the sun-side of Mercury." "Teejay, I want to -- well, I want to thank you for saving my life." The woman opened her cape, reached inside, took a pack of cigarettes from an inside pocket and puffed on one until it glowed. "Don't thank me," she said coolly. "It really isn't necessary. You're the only extra-zoo man aboard, Stedman, so we needed you. I'd have saved a valuable machine under the same circumstances,"  "Well, thanks anyway." "There's one thing more, Sted- man. As far as I'm concerned, you haven't proven yourself yet. So the same conditions apply to our next landing point." "Where's that?" "Venus, of course. Do you think I want to play hop-scotch all over the Solar System? Well, you finish your meal and give that stone worm a nice comfortable bubble to live in." And Teejay departed. ated the air from one of the bubble-cages and increased the temperature to seven hundred degrees Fahrenheit, after he'd supervised a slow warming process for the worm and seen it deposited, still drowsy, in the bubble with sufficient quantities of silicon-compounds to keep it well fed, Steve hobbled with his crutches to the general lounge. Teejay sat there with half a dozen of the Venusian experts, for the hunt would be much more protracted on that teeming jungle-world. The woman stood up at once and crossed the floor to Steve. "How's the worm?" "Fine." He always felt a little edgy and on his guard when the woman spoke to him. "And how's the extra-zoo expert's bum leg." "Coming along, I think." Teejay turned to the six men seated around the lounge, said : "This is Steve Stedman, our extrazoo man -- at least temporarily! about amphibians than any man alive, lanelio is our aboreal expert, Smith ferrets out the cave-dwelling mammals -- we hope, Waneki goes floundering around after sea-monsters, St. Clair is -- " Then something buzzed shrilly on the adjacent wall, and Teejay flipped a toggle switch. "Captain here." "Radio from Earth, Captain. Mr. Brody Carmical himself.' "Is that so?" said Teejay, her eyebrows lifting. "Give me a circuit." And, a moment later, 'that's the trouble, Brody?" The big man's voice came through faint and metallic over space. "Plenty, T. J., Barling decided to start in the middle this year. Some of our -- er, contacts told us his ship's rocketing for Ganymede, and fast. You'll have to get there first if you can, naturally." "We'll get there," said Teejay, quite grim, and cut the connection. Steve had time to think one thought before he was swept along in the general rush, crutches and all, after the woman galvanized into activity. She might take orders from Brody Carmical, but she even had a way with the big man, making him cow to her -- perhaps unconsciously. Teejay was yelling and pointing, it seemed, in all directions at once. "Hey you, lanello, shake a leg down to the fission-room and tell 'em to start straining. Smith, get me Kevin McGann on the intercom. Waneki, you can forget all about those Venusian sea-monsters and tell the docs to be ready for plenty of acceleration cases. You better bed as strong as the rest of us, not with sixty years of junketing behind you. Hello, McGann? Listen, Mac, I want the entire crew assembled in General inside of ten minutes. Yeah, expedition too. Everyone but those boys down in fission. And tell your orbit-man to figure a way to get us off this trajectory and on a quick ellipse from here to the Jovian moons. Yes, that's what I said -- the Jovian moons." She paused long enough to take a breath and turn to Steve. "Well, Stedman, we'll be dropping down over your brother's grave on Ganym,ede before you know it. Maybe then you'll be able to remove that chip from your shoulder." "Me? From my shoulder? Sister, you've got things backwards." But the woman pivoted away, and Kevin's voice bleated over the intercom : "Crew and expedition -- all to general lounge on the double! You boys in fission stay put. Captain's orders. This is urgent." Almost before Kevin's voice had stopped echoing through the corridors, LeClarc popped into the lounge. "You wanted me. Captain? May I help?" "I wanted everyone. Everyone can help. Just sit still till the rest of 'em get here." LeClarc appeared hurt, but he took a seat in glum silence. In twos and threes the members of the crew began to drift in, wild rumors circulating among them in whispers. Finally, LeClarc counted noses and told his Captain that everyone except the fission crew was present. Teejay nodded, stepped to the center of the floor. She removed her cape and dropped it, discarding it so suddenly and yet with such a polished flourish that a complete silence fell upon the large room almost at once. She paced back and forth, her bare, lithe limbs flashing under the green-glowing wall panels. "You've all come to know that cape," she said, her voice strident and alive. "It's a sort of affectation I have. But it's not necessary. Like everything that's not necessary, it must be discarded, at least temporarily. Men, we're in serious trouble." Just like that, inside of a few sec onds, she had them eating out of the palm of her hand. She went on to say that Barling's ship had already blasted off from the Earth for Ganymede, how,, unless their efforts here on the Gordak were Herculean and then some, Barling's ship would reach Ganymede first, "And you all know what that would mean," she continued. "Like the elephant of two centuries ago, the Ganymeden anthrovac is the one solid necessity for any circus sideshow. But the anthrovacs have a way of going into hiding when they're disturbed. So, if Barling gets to Ganymede first, we've had it. We can all start looking for jobs after that, do you understand? I want full acceleration from here to Ganymede, as soon as we can get the new orbit plotted. Nothing but the immediate problem -- to reach the Jovian moons before Barling -- nothing else matters. If I tell you to work two shifts and go without sleep one night, you will do that. If I decide that a man must go beyond the shieldings in fission, he'll climb into a vac-suit and hope for the best. It's going to be like that, men, and I can't help it. I crack the whip and you jump. Any questions?" She stood dramatically, hands on hips, somehow poised on tip-toes without straining, a tall, impressive and quite beautiful figure. "Yes," said one of the orbiteers... "I have a question. Can I get to work on the new orbit at once?" There were hoarse shouts of approval, some applause and a scattering of deep-throated laughter. Steve watched Tee jay walk off her improvised stage, complete master of the situation. If it were humanly possible for the Gordak to reach Ganymede before Barling, they'd do it. Steve learned something of what the big Exec officer had meant that first day he had spoken about Teejay. She drove her men relentlessly and some of them may have resented it. But she drove herself as well, and once when a crewman had gone beyond the shieldings to repair the mechanical arms which regulated the flow of powdered plutonium fuel from the bunkers and had emerged with a serious case of radiation sickness, Tee jay donned a vac-suit and went in herself to finish the job. Most of the men liked her. Some, frankly, did not. But all of them knew they served under a captain as good as any. Two days before landing on Ganymede, Tee jay gathered her chief lieutenants for a final' planning session. Kevin was there, and LeClarc, and a tall, wraith-thin man with a bushy head of white hair named Simonson, and Steve. Teejay spread a chart out and peered down at it intently. "This is Ganymede Northeast," she said, indicating the circled, central area of the map. "It is here that, for some reason, the anthrovacs gather. And here inside the circle is an area of one thousand square miles which Mr. Simonson has marked off -- yes, Stedman, the red square. We'll be operating there. If the Barling ship has landed ahead of us, we can assume the same for them." Teejay paused to light a cigarette, then crushed it out after her first puff. "The dam smoke gets in my way when I try to think," she smiled, and went on, "Anyway, here's the square. We'll be using the crew and the expedition -- everyone aboard ship -- because we're in a hurry. Simply put, we'll be a bunch of beaters to drive the anthrovacs together at the center of the square. Then, well, then it's up to Mr. Simonson and Stedman. Any questions?" "Yes, Captain," said LeGlarc. "Just how do we get the anthrovacs aboard ship?" "Don't ask me. But you might ask Mr. Simonson." The bushy-haired man named Simonson grunted. "Umm-mm. There are several ways. We could set up elaborate traps, such as Thomdyke employed two years ago, and -- "Can't," Teejay objected. "No time." "Why don't we just clobber them?" LeGlarc suggested. "A few might die, but we'll get the specimens we want." Steve shook his head. "You don't know your anthrovacs. Chase them and they'll try to run away. But hurt them -- just hurt otle of them so the rest of them can see -- and they'll swarm all over you until either all the men or all the anthrovacs are dead, or both. No, there's another way." "What's that?" Teejay leaned forward, chin cupped in hands, definitely interested.  "Anthrovacs are non-breathers. Most gasses won't hurt them, but you can give them a good, old-fashioned oxygen jag with the slightest whiff of pure oxygen." "I've heard of that," Simonson said. "Sort of like getting them drunk, isn't it, boy?" Kevin wanted to know. But LeClarc wasn't satisfied. "I still say we ought to clobber them. We can't waste time experimenting' with any crazy jags." "It's no experiment," Steve told him coldly. "It works." "I still say we ought to -- " "Clobber them, I know," Teejay finished for him. "If there's any clobbering to be done, LeClarc, I'll let you know. Meanwhile, we're trying Stedman's plan. Any further questions?" And, when no one spoke : "Good. Mac, I want you to let Mr. Simonson and Stedman pick three men to help 'em. You're to divide the rest of us into groups of half a dozen each, with each group serving under a leader. I'll give each leader a designated area in that square, so there won't be a lot of bumbling around when we land on Ganymede. LeClarc!" "Yes, Captain?" "Take yourself a group of three idle technicians and check all the vac-suits. If there's any trouble, make sure it's repaired before we land. What are you gawking at me like that for?" "I only thought -- " "What? What did you think? Speak up, manJ" "I thought you would have a job of more import for me. Had you, for example, decided that we ought to clobber -- " "Clobber, clobber, clobber! Will you shut up and get to work?" "Yes, Captain," And more than a little stooped of shoulder, LeClarc left the lounge. Tee jay didn't pause for breath. "You, Stedman! What's so funny? What are you laughing about?" "Nothing. It's just the way LeGlarc -- " "Forget it, before you get clobbered." After the landing, an unreasoning fear gripped Steve tightly. It wasn't anything he could put his  finger on, but he felt it gnawing at the fringes of his mind, probing, seeking, thrusting for a way in. There was nothing to be afraid of, and Steve smoked one cigarette after another while the six-man parties disembarked to take up their beater-stations on the edges of the square. , Ganymede, he recited to himself, is the largest satellite in the Solar System. # miles from Jupiter, it has a diameter of thirty two hundred and six miles, or bigger than the planet Mercury and almost as large as Pluto. It swings around Jupiter in a little over seven Earth days and in appearance the moonscape's enough like Luna to be a twin-brother, except for fat, bloated Jupiter hanging in the sky. What was there to be afraid of? Steve didn't know. His brother had died on Ganymede -- and the circumstances of Charlie's death still bordered on the mysterious. Well, he'd see for himself about that. Did the fear crawl around the edges of his brain because he thought Teejay was responsible? But that didn't make sense, for to a certain degree he'd thought that all along. Unless the appalling thought of having to fight Tee jay and her whole loyal crew had taken hold of him unconsciously. "What are you moping about, boy?" "Huh? Oh, Kevin. Nothing much, I guess. I -- " "You look to me like you've seen a ghost. What is it, scared?" "Yeah, Yeah, I guess so." "So what? Buck up, boy." "I don't want to be scared, Kevin." "Who does?" "That's not what I ' mean. It's one thing to say that if you aren't -- " "Who isn't? Don't look at me, boy. And didn't you watch all the men trooping outside with the blood drained from their faces, and their eyes sort of big and too bright behind the face-plates? We're all scared." "But why?" "Mean to say you spent so much time on zoology and forgot about other things? Like, for instance, Ganymede-f ear ?" "Huh? How's that?"  "Everyone is afraid, Steve. Everyone... Whenever a man gets near Ganymede, he suddenly becomes afraid. It's some sort of a psychological or maybe para-psychological phenomenon and none of the medicos could ever figure it out. It isn't the kind of fear that paralyzes, boy, but still, it holds on all the time a man's on Ganymede and it doesn't leave until he blasts off again. Didn't you ever hear about that?" "No. That is, I knew it happened somewhere, but I forgot where." "Well, that's all there is to it, boy." ' "All! Don't you think it's enough? Something lurks out there, something makes people afraid, and we've never been able to find out why, but you say -- " Tee jay came up and smiled at them, but there was something grirri about her smile. "You can always tell when someone comes to Ganymede for the first time. He's jumpier. Just relax, Stedman. By the time they start beating the anthrovacs in toward the G or dak you'll be feeling better -- and raring to go  to work with that oxygenjag stunt of yours, too." And she added, "Say, have you been watching your stone worm?"  "He sure has," Kevin told her. "He took me down there yesterday and that worm's been growing fat on all the sand he's fed it. Sand -- for food, that's what the worm eats. Imagine how that would settle the over-population problems on Earth if people, too, could eat sand." "Yes, and then -- " Tee jay was speaking again -- but words, just words, and Steve stopped listening. It occurred to him all at once that they were engrossed in their meaningless conversation for one reason only -- to keep the fear from their minds. If you thought about something else, the fear would retreat at least in part, and if you could hold a conversation about everything and nothing, that was even better. Steve almost jumped off the floor when a metallic voice blared forth from the loudspeaker, echoing and re-echomg in the near-empty room. "Captain! Captain, this is Moretti, Group Seven." "Go ahead, Moretti," Teejay said into the mike. "I'm listening." "Who the devil's on radar. Captain?" "Why -- no one! We forgot." "There's a ship coming dwn. We can see it plain as day out here." "What diip?" Teejay asked softly, but they all knew the question was totally unnecessary. Moretti's voice jumped an octave as he cried: "It's Barling!" the beaters had been called in. Barling's big ship, the Frank Buck, snorted back and forth angrily on its landing jets. "Are they gonna land or ain't they gonna land?" someone said as Kevin broke out the neutron guns and saw that every third man had one. "Depends on their boss," said Kevin. "If he figures we can be scared off, he'll land. Otherwise, maybe he'll go away." "Not that little stinker," Teejay told him. "Not Schuyler Barling. He won't go away. Will the fact that we're here first matter? It will not, for Schuyler knows we can't prove it. You ought to know better than to hope for that, Kevin. NOj we can figure that Schuyler will move in on us." "What happens then?" Steve demanded. Tee jay shrugged her bare, beautiful shoulders. "That I don't know. Schuyler may be a stinker and may be predictable, but he's not that predictable. Hey, it looks like the Frank Bck is coming down!" The big ship, Steve saw, was doing precisely that. Its jets had been cut, and the ship fell like a stone. Twice its length separated it from the rubble-strewn pumice when the pilot kicked his jets over again, and something seemed to slap the Frank Buck back up toward the starry sky. The result was a first-rate landing. "That would be Schuyler showing off," said Teejay wearily. "He must have been born in a tube and weaned on jet-slag, and he sure lets you know it." Fifteen minutes later, Schuyler Barling and three of his officers entered the Gordak. Barling got out of his vacsuit first, a tall, handsome man of about thirty, with short-cropped blond hair, pale blue eyes and petulant lips. "Captain Moore," he said, bowing slightly from the waist. Making fun of Teejay. "Mr. Barling." As ever, the woman seemed cool and unruffled. "With us," said Schuyler Barling, "it's in the family. I work for my father. Obviously, it means something to me whether he succeeds or not. But you, Captain Moore, you're a hired hand. You work for Brody Carmical, on a paycheck. Therefore, your loyalty could not possibly be as strong as mine, and -- " "Get to the point!"  "We arrived here on Ganymede almost simultaneously. One of us will have to leave." "It didn't look simultaneous to me. Barling ignored her. "Yes, one will have to leave, because the anthrovac is frightened off easily and unless a hunt is carried on with the utmost precision and timing, no one will catch any anthrovacs." "Go on," said Teejay. She spoke quietly, but Steve knew the woman well enough to realize her temper was coming to a boil, inside. "My Frank Buck got here first," Barling told her blandly. "Therefore, you will leave." "That's a stinking lie!" Teejay cried. "We were here first and you know it." "Who can prove it? The Frank BwcA: landed first." Barling's hand flashed down to his waist, came up gripping a neutron gun. "If we have to, we'll force you to leave." Teejay stood with hands on hips, facing him. "I know I'm not conducting myself like a lady, but then, this is the twenty-second century," she said, smiling -- and struck out with her balled right fist. It bounced off Barling's jaw with savage force and the man stumbled back against the wall and crashed to the floor, his neutron gun clattering away. Barling shook himself, tried to rise. He got to hands and knees, then fell forward on his face. Teejay whirled on his officers. "All right, get him out of here ! Come on, move." T he three men looked at each other. None of them did anything. "You see, boy?" said Kevin, grinning. "That's our Captain and we'll fight for her. She won the beauty pageant five years ago in Cerestown, and she can fight like a man. She's a woman for the stars, and we're proud to -- " "Shut up," said Teejay. "That won't get us anywhere."  By now, Barling had stirred, had come up, dazed, into a sitting position. He rubbed his jaw, winced. "Assuming we return to our ship, we still won't leave Ganymede. Not without our anthrovac." "Nor will we." "But you had to hit me! You had to flaunt your -- "No one told you to draw your gun." " -- flaunt yoiur Amcizonian prowess. "Stop sniveling, Schuyler. I think we'll have to reach some sort of a compromise, but I'll dictate terms, not you." "Yes?" Barling growled up at her. "Who says we'll obey?" "Oh, get up ofT the floor! You look so silly, sitting there and rubbing your chin. Barling stood up, retrieving his gun but bolstering it. Kevin watched him, toying with his own weapon -- not pointing it at anyone in particular, but tossing it back and forth idly from hand to hand. "Give us twenty four hours," said Teejay. "We'll look for our anthrovac. In that time, none of your men is to leave the Frank Buck, After that, you get twenty four hours, and we're confined to the G or dak. Then us, then you. And so on, till one of us gets his anthrovac. Then he pulls out and the other is left here. Is it a deal?" Barling considered, said: "Well, yes -- with one change. We get the first twenty four hours." "No." "Then you can forget your deal, Captain Moore." "Well, then let's tos for it." Teejay reached into a pocket of her cape, flipped a coin to Steve. "Here, Stedman. You toss it." "Who gets to call?" Barling demanded. "Do you. want to?" "Well -- " , "Good. Then I will. Ladies first, you know. Go ahead, Stedman." Steve tossed the coin, and Teejay cried: "Heads!" Palming the coin, Steve flipped it over on the back of his left hand, peered at it. Staring up at him was the metallic likeness of Angus MacNamara, first man to reach the planet Mars. "Heads," said Steve, and one of Barling's officers came over to verify it. Barling shook his head stubbornly. "How do I know it isn't a phony, a two-headed coin?" Teejay glared at him. "That's insulting, Schuyler." "Well, I'd like to look at it. How do I know -- " "You don't. But I said it's insulting. So, if you want to see the coin, you'll have to fight me!" "Never mind," said Barling, climbing into his vac-suit. "You get first try." And all of them garbed in their vac-suits once more, the men of the Frank Buck departed. "Get those beaters out again!" Teejay was calling into her micro phone, and Kevin grasped Steve's arm said: "Go ahead) boy. Look at the coin." Steve did. It had two heads. And later, Teejay said to him: "Listen, Stedman. All the beaters are out now, but frankly, I don't trust Schuyler." Steve said he did not blame her, and Kevin was there to nod his red head. "So, Stedman, the beaters have their jobs to do. That's almost everyone. But temporarily at least, it leaves you and Mac here with nothing to do." "That's true," said Kevin. "But not for long, Mac. Schuyler may try something, I don't know what. You two are probably the strongest men on this ship. I know what you can do, Mac -- and I saw a sample of Stedman at work when he had that little run-in with LeGlarc. All right: you two hop into a couple of vac-suits. That is, if Stedman's ready to fight for us if he has to -- " Steve chuckled, "I don't go' around carrying two-headed coins, Teejay, but I know a rat when I see one. I'll go, and your friend Schuyler better not try anything." Almost, he was surprised at his own words. Teejay had a way of commanding respect,, and if he didn't viatch himself, he'd be talking like Kevin soon. Well, perhaps the woman merited it... His thoughts took him that far, and then he remembered Charlie. "Fll go," he said again, almost growling. "But you still have a chip on your shoulder -- well, never mind. I'll expect quarter-hourly reports from you two." "You'll get them," said Kevin, and climbed into his vac-suit. self out on the bleak, desolate surface of Ganymede, walking wdth Kevin past the long, silent length of the Frank Buck, And here, outside the confining walls of their spaceship, the Ganymede-fear seemed stronger. Steve felt it as something palpable, clutching at his heart and constricting it, bringing sweat to his forehead and clouding the inside of his helmet with moisture. Fear -- of what? Not of the frontier world itself, surely. Not of some unknown menace lurking out among the craterlets and ringwalls. No, for while Ganymede was not yet as familiar as Mars or Venxis, mankind still had explored it extensively. There were the strange anthrovacs, animals which looked like over-sizec and less brutish gorillas but which were not protoplasm creatures and which took their energy directly from sunlight and cosmic radiation. But that was all -- no other life existed on Ganymede, and the anthrovacs on their frigid, airless world were something of an oddity. Then what caused the fear? And was the fear responsible in any way for what had happened to Charlie? "Hey, Steve -- snap out of it!" Kevin's voice, floating in thinly on the intercom. "Huh? Oh, yeah, Kevin. Sure, It's that fear, sort of gets you out here. You cant help it." 'T know. A ship seems to cut it off to some extent, boy. But it's around, lurking, waiting to get you." "What do you mean, waiting to get )u?" "Well, not directly. But it makes you make mistakes. Men have died that way -- paying so much attention to the fear that they didn't pay enough attention to whatever was happening." "Kevin, do you know anything about how Charlie died you haven't told me?" "Maybe. Maybe not. It's kind of vague, boy. Teejay went out alone and when she came back -- why, she looked scared. That's common enough on Ganymede -- everyone looks scared. But Teejay looked puzzled and confused also, and that's not like her. She wouldn't talk much for a time, and when she did she just said she'd found Charlie Stedman, your brother, dead." "Where?" "What do you mean, where? Out here on Ganymede, naturally." "No, I mean exactly where. What was done with the body?" "That I don't know," said Kevin, and Steve could picture him frowning inside his helmet. "Well -- listen, Kevin! Do you hear something?" "Hear something? How can you hear anything on Ganymede, with no air to carry it? Except on the radio, of course. I hear you, but get a grip on yourself, boy." "No. I hear something. There it is, louder. My God, Kevin! My God -- And clumsily in his vacsuit, Steve began running away acrqss the pumice. "Hey, come back! Back here you crazy fool -- " Kevin charged after him, taking long, ungainly strides ,in the light gravity. But Steve was quicker and soon the distance between them increased and Kevin realized he wouldn't be able to overtake Steve at all. "Gome back! What do you hear, boy? At least tell me that." Steve told him, and ran on. mazed, Kevin lumbered back toward the Gordak, "But what made him do it?" Teejay demanded, later. "I told you all I know, Captain. He said he heard something and started running. I chased after him, couldn't catch him. He told me what he heard." "What?" "Weil, you won't like this, because it doesn't make sense. But he said he heard his brother -- calling him. Charlie Stedman, calling." "Charlie Stedman is dead." Suddenly, Teejay was curt, preemptory. "That's what I thought, too." "Forget it. It's the Ganymedefear, Mac. Somehow it got to Stedman stronger than it got to most people. Maybe his brother was hit that way, too. Maybe, right now, Stedman is off his rocker, running out across the pumice somewhere, shouting his brother's name into the soundless void of space." "We'll have to find him," said Kevin. "How can we, Mac? He's got air for five or six hours, and Ganymede is big." "I'm going to take a set of shoulf der-jets and go looking for him. Captain. I hope you won't try to stop me. I'm going either way." Shruing, Tee jay went to a cabinet, handed Kevin a pair of shoulder-jets, which he strapped at once to his vacsuit. The woman took another suit and another pair of jets. "Once I heard voices out here on Ganymede, too," she said. "So did Charlie Stedman. They killed Charlie and they almost killed me. Enough's enough, Mac. I'm going with you." large. Slowed by his vac-suit, a man might cover its diameter in half an hour. But Steve did not traverse the circular area. Instead, he climbed the ringwall laboriously and then made his way down, tumbling and sliding, to the rocky floor of the shallow crater. The voice came from within it -- from within the crater. It could not be! He told himself that more than once. The rock of Ganymede itself might carry sound, but you'd feel it only as a throbbing through the soles of your boots, for the vacuum of space which encroached on all sides could not transmit soundwaves. That was science.' That was elementary. But the voipe whispered in his ears, ebbing and flowing, first loud, then soft -- and science be damned. Charlie was calling.  am Charlie Stedman, I am Charlie Stedman -- That was all, but it was enough. Charlie's name, and Charlie's voice. "It can't be happening," Steve said, aloud, and heard his own voice roaring inside the helmet. It drove the other voice, the impossible voice, out for a mornent, but it returned. Around the innercircumference of the ringwall Steve ran, seeking a source for the impossible. Sobbing, stumbling, he plunged ahead. It was only when he returned to his starting point, a needle-like pinnacle of rock, that he realized his supply of air would be exhausted in three hours. "He couldn't have gone much farther than this, Mac." "We've got plenty of air. Captain. I'm not giving up -- The two figures soared on spurting jets a hundred feet above the surface of Ganymede. When Teejay went higher every few moments, she could barely , make out the two spaceships, far away to the left. Occasionally she saw the beaters working in teams of six, cumbersome tanks of oxygen strapped to their backs. "Did you hear the voice, Mac?" "No." "Had Stedman been drinking?" "That's ridiculous. The boy was with us, and you saw for yourself." "True. And I've said that the voices of Ganymede are no strangers to me, anyway. Maybe I was trying to rationalize." "We'll see when we find Steve." "# we find him. The fear can make you do crazy things out here, Mac. Like going for too long without sufficient oxygen." , "That's what I'm worrying about." A phonograph needle caught in one groove spinning out its brief message over and over again -- that was the. voice. I am Charlie Stedman. And the ringwall might have been the record, Steve thought bitterly, except that it was utterly deserted. He hadn't covered its entire rock-strewn area; an army of searchers would be necessary to do that. But he had seen enough to convince him that -- The thought fled. Coming toward him over the floor of the ringwall was a huge anthrovac, walking erect with a shuffling gait. Charlie's voice grew louder. "It's no good, Mac. We can't find him." "As soon as, we turn back he's as good as dead." "Our air won't last forever," Teejay said. "He's got even less." "Ten more minutes?" "All right, ten. But why did you come out here with me if you're ready to give up so easy?" "Who said I am? I'm trying to be practical, Mac. Listen, I saved Stedman's life once already -- and stayed out on the hot side of Mercury longer than a person should, too. I like Stedman, but if we ever find him, better not say that or I'll break your neck, hear? So I want to find him, but I don't want to sacrifice your life or mine in the attempt. Is that clear?" Kevin said that it was. A moment later, Teejay climbed higher. Half a thousand feet above the surface of Ganymede she circled. Abruptly, she leveled off t a hundred feet again, said: "There's something over there, Mac. In that ringwall." "What?" "I don't know. Movement. A big figure # ind a little one. The big one seems too large for a man, but the smaller -- well,det's go." The anthrovac paused a dozen yards from Steve. There had been nothing hostile in its movements to begin with, and now it might have been a statue for all the activity it displayed. From crown of head to small, handlike feet, it stood almost a yard taller than Steve, but it did not have the great-muscled girth of a gorilla. Instead, it looked quite manlike, except for the incredibly broad shoulders, the thick, matted hair covering its entire body, the toolong arms, the nine feet of height. Did the voice emanate from it? Now that the creature had approached him, Steve wasn't sure. The voice continued, pulsing and throbbing in his ears like the Ganymede-fear itself -- hut in his ears. Not from the bleak terrain around him, and certainly not from the anthrovac. "I'm going crazy," he said, aloud, driving the voice away temporarily. "No. No, I'm not, because I realize it too soon. A crazy man doesn't realize it and doesn't warn himself, about it -- certainly not at the outset." But did that mean the voice had any real existence? How could it? I am Charlie Stedman... Smiling bleakly, Steve picked up a loose chunk of rock, tossed it at the anthrovac. Tlie creature merely swung its huge body gracefully at the hips, avoiding the missile. Ifhen it stooped, found a stone for itself, hurled it at Steve. He ducked, feeling completely and tremendously foolish. He should have been prepared, for the anthrovacs are playful and can mime almost any human action. He did not duck in time. He felf the stone thunk against his helmet, peered with horror at the glassite inches from his face until he saw that it hadn't cracked. Grinning now, he shook his fist at the creature, watched it duplicate the motion with its great hairy hand. It was a game, Steve told himself,  lc#t like the meaningless conversation Teejay and Kevin had had to dispell the Ganymede-fear. But if the anthrovac could mime human actions, perhaps the anthro vac could also mime voices! That would necessitate telepathic powers, naturally. But the anthrovac, like many denizens of terrestrial forests and tundras, changed its habits immensely in captivity. A captured anthrovac, one which had been reared with one of the circus troupes, could never tell you what a wild anthrovac was like. And a wild anthrovac, somehow living on airless Ganymede and taking its energy directly from cosmic and solar radiation, might be able to do anything. I am Charlie Stedman... Steve carried the thought to its logical conclusion. Suppose an anthrovac -- this anthrovac which faced him now -- had somehow heard Charlie speaking. Charlie might have been introducing himself to someone: "I am Charlie Stedman." But the hypothesis wasn't much more than a bubble, and it burst completely when Steve remembered he was the only one who could hear the voice, "Hey, Stedman! You trying to kill yourself?" Steve whirled, looked up. Two figures, no more than vaguely human in their cumbersome vac-suits, hovered over him, jetting around in circles. The anthrovac had seen them too -- and now, apparently alarmed by the twin forms floating just out of reach, the creature turned and bounded away over the uneven terrain. "What gave you that idea?" Steve called into his intercom. "The anthrovac wasn't looking for trouble." "I don't mean that, stupid." Teejay had a way of jarring him back to reality with a few words. "I mean, how much air have you left?" Steve looked at the guge. "Enough to return to the Gordak, provided I get on my horse." "We'll walk with you, then," said Teejay, and dropped to the ground at his side. "I think I'll hold onto your arm, too. You're liable to go wandering again, and we might not be able to find you." Kevin alighted, switched off his jets. "How about the voice, boy? Do you still hear it?" "Why -- no! But I did a minute ago, until the anthrovac ran away." "That's peculiar."  "There's a lot that's peculiar out here on Ganymede, Kevin. I think -- "Stop thinking and start walking," Teejay told him. Less than twa hours later, they reached the Gordak, A vac-suited man met them at the airlock, and Steve saw LeClarc's face through the glassite helmet. "I'll bet you were worried," said Teejay. "Sure," LeClarc answered, drawing a neutron gun from his belt. "See, my Captain, I'm so worried I can hardly think straight. Will the three of you please turn around and march over to the Frank Buckr They were too stunned to do anything else. "F#N'T mind me," Kevin JL- said, within the Frank Buck. "If I'm confused it's merely because I can't believe this. Not you, LeClarc, not you." They'd been ushered into the main lounge of the Frank Buck a ship of about the Gor dak's dimensions, but two or three years older. LeClarc stood there with his neutron gun, watching them carefully. In a few moments, Schuyler Barling joined them, a grealy salve covering the discoloration on his jaw. The jaw looked painfully swollen too, and Barling rubbed it speculatively. "I won't forget this," he growled briefly to Teejay, then turned to LeClarc. "Kevin McGann I know, but what about this man?" "Stedman?" said LeClarc. "You'll want him, because he's the extra-zoo man on the Gordak. If you took McGann and the woman alone, they still might be able to do their work on Carmical's ship. But with Stedman your prisoner as well. their hands are tied over there." "What is this?" Teejay demanded defiantly. "What's the meaning of -- " "Will you be quiet and let me do the talking?" Barling interrupted her. "It was LeClarc who radioed and told me your coin had two heads. If you wanted to play the game that way, I wasn't going to stand by and let you. So -- " "So," LeClarc took up the thread for him, "we got together, Mr. Barling and I." "But you, LeClarc," said Kevin. "You'd jump through a fire-hoop into a pit of acid if Captain Moore told you to." "Would I?" LeClarc chuckled softly. "Yes, Yes, you would." "Perhaps there was a time I'd have done that, McGann. Perhaps. But then I thought the Captain needed me, and wanted me to help her, too. Now, with you and Stedman -- well, LeClarc isn't so important, is he?" "So that's it!" Kevin roared. "You're jealous. Not jealous the way a man should be, when he loves a woman, but jealous because you believed Captain Moore had discarded you -- had decided you weren't such an essential cog in the Gordak machine." "Shut up." LeClarc took a quick step toward Kevin and hit him, hooking his left fist at the bigger man's jaw. Kevin staggered but did not go down. Bellowing, he charged at LeClarc, but the Frenchman waved him off with the neutron gun. "Stop it, LeClarc!" Barling snapped. "I didn't have you bring them here to make a shambles of the lounge. Just stand off in the corner -- that's right, there -- and watch them. I'll do the talking." "You realize, of course," Teejay told him calmly, "that this is kidnapping." "Is it? Who is to say? You never entered the Gordak; LeClarc met you within the airlock. For all your crew knows, the three of you are out on Ganymede somewhere --  with not much air left. After a time, they'll have to give you up as dead. With the Captain gone, and the Exec, and the expert on Extra-terrestrial zoology -- their expedition won't amount to much. It looks to me like old man Garmical will be without a circus this year, unless he resorts to a strictly terrestrial shindig." "What happens then?" Teejay wanted to know. "Well, I'll be frank with you, I haven't decided. I can't simply return you to civilization, of course." "Of course," Teejay echoed him acidly. "Then you'd be able to holler 'kidnapper'. It would seem tha#: you give me only one alternative. Ah -- excuse me a moment." A trio of men had entered the lounge and the leader, a stocky man of about thirtyfive, was beaming. "We've got three," he said. "Splendid, splendid. In that case, nothing remains to keep us on Ganymede." "Chief, I'm sure glad of that. This place can give you the heebies, and you never know why. Those three anthrovacs should be a fine core to build your circus around, though," "Three anthrovacs?" Teejay cried, her composure fading for the first time. "You've got three anthrovacs?" Barling nodded. "LeClarc here was good enough to tell us Stedman's plan. A first-rate idea, as you can see, only we were able to carry it out. Frankly, I wasn't sq optimistic at first." "Let's get back to us," Teejay suggested. "You were saying...?" ' "Umm-mm, yes. There's only one alternative, and much as I regret -- " "What is it? What's the alternative?" "Please, must I say it? I thiiik you know, and there's no need for me to -- " ' "No, I want to hear it." "Suit yourself," said Barling. "The only solution is this: we'll have to eliminate you." "When?" "The sooner the better. But Captain Moore, you're making me feel -- " "That's all I wanted to know!" Teejay cried, and hurled herself at Barling. "We might as well try to escape while we still have a chance." A fter that, things hap. pened almost too fast for Steve to follow. Kevin got the idea at once, charging at LeClarc before the Frenchman had time to gather his wits. The neutron gun hissed violently, searing a three-inch chunk out of the ceiling. But then LeClarc was struck by two hundred poimds of Kevin McGann, and went down before the onslaught. Something exploded against Steve's jaw and he did a quick flip and landed on his back. He'd hardly had time to declare himself in the battle, when one of Barling's men had jumped him. Now the man came down atop him, flailing with both fists, but Steve chopped at his face with short, clubbing blows and scrambled to his feet while the man caught his breath. Steve didn't wait, plunging toward the man with murder in his eyes -- and failed to reach him. An arm circled his neck from behind and he was dragged to the floor again, by the second of the three anthrovac hunters. He rolled over, saw Kevin and LeClarc off to his right, standing toe-to-toe and slugging. And beyond them, Teejay was cuffing Barling around the lounge with lusty, man-sized blows. Barling went down under the onslaught, falling at the woman's feet, but then the third hunter had grasped her swirling black cape from behind, throwing it over her head and tripping her. She fought blindly as she went down, taking the hunter with her; and with Barling, they became a tangled melee of thrashing arms and legs. Steve rolled out from under the second hunter, but the first one met him halfway and pole-axed him down to the floor again with a hard right hand. Sobbing, clutching at the man's legs, Steve began to pull himself upright and got a knee in his face. He went down again, and this time everything in the room receded into a vague, shadowy fog. When Steve could see again, there was still no order to the chaos. He hadn't lived a violent life like Kevin or Teejay -- such things were not part of his background, although he'd boxed in college and won the light-heavyweight championship, too. But there was something different, something elemental about a free-for-all brawl. LeClarc lay on his back, supine. He looked out of it for the duration, which still set the odds at four to three against the trio from the Gordak. Right now Kevin held his own with the two hunters who'd done Steve in, at least temporarily. But that couldn't last, for both were big, muscular men. And Teejay? She was a woman, so perhaps the-odds were even worse. Steve smiled grimly as he clambered to his feet to help Kevin, Teejay was a woman, but she was the new twentysecond century woman, and proud of it. The third hunter kicked and thrashed helplessly on the floor as she held him in a head-scissors and a the same time fended off Barling-who was crawling around them and looking for an opening. Teejay, definitely, was an asset. Steve got to hunter number three quickly, pulling him off Kevin and straightening him with an uppercut. After that, it was a set-up. Steve pounded once and then again with his left hand at the man's midsection, then finished by crossing his right and feeling it crunch against the man's jaw. "Now I see how you could take care of LeClarc that first day I" Kevin yelled, and promptly polished off the other hunter with a blow that lifted him completely off the floor. As one, they whirled around to face the other side of the room. Barling and his henchman had finally got the upper hand. Teejay lay on her side her hands behind her back. Not unconscious, she was completely spent, and an almost equally exhausted Barling was attempting to tie her hands with the black cape. The hunter sat there, dulleyed, watching them. It was Kevin who lifted the hunter and hurled him away, and when Steve rolled Barling over and pushed him against the wall, the man did not resist. Teejay climbed to her feet, unsteadily. T -- guess Tm growingsoft," she panted. "Maybe -- I don't know -- maybe training and muscletoning from -- infancy -- aren't the answer. A gal just isn't cut out for rough and tumble fighting." Her hand flashed up to her forehead, the back of it resting against her brow. "Ooo, Steve, catch me -- She fainted in his arms. Somehow, they got Teejay injo her vac-suit. The walls of the lounge were sound-proofed, and the struggle had attracted no one. Silently they made their way out of the lounge and through the corridors of the Frank Buck heading for the airlock. Steve toted Teejay over his shoulder, and remembering Mercury, felt very good about it. He ached all over from the fight and he knew he'd need some mending. But she'd called him Steve, and that -- suddenly and ridiculously -- . was most important. "What's going on here?" A crewman met them in the corridor and bellowed his challenge. Kevin raised the neutron gun he had taken from LeClatc. He never used it. A fraction of a second later, the Frank Buck blasted off from the surface of Ganymede, and sudden acceleration threw them all to the floor. As Steve was to learn later, no hands were at the controls. No human hands. X nation," began Barling, pacing back and forth, speaking out of swollen lips and averting the right side of his face with its puffy cheek and blackened eye. "We are all in this together, and -- " "You hypocrite!" cried Teejay. "Six hours ago, you wanted to kill us. Now, because something unexpected pops up, you change yoiu: mind. Temporarily, for as long as you can use us, is that it?" "No. If we can get out of this I'll forget about kidnapping." "Well... "You haven't any other choice. Captain Moore." "He's right," Kevin admitted. "But what's the trouble we're in, Mr. Barling?" "Six hour ago you three jumped us and almost made your escape. But the Frank Buck took off; suddenly, without warning. None of my men was at the controls "That doesn't make sense," Steve objected. "I didn't think so, either. I almost don't know how to explain it, what I've seen with my own eyes after my men held you in detention here in the lounge." "Why don't you begin at the beginning?' Tee jay said, and yawned. "Don't be funny. Somehow, the anthrovacs escaped from their bubbles and -- "What?" This was Steve, more than slightly incredulous. "Anthrovacs are mild creatures and unless they're attacked they won't do anything violent." "That's what I thought, Stedman, I don't know what to think now. The anthrovacs escaped -- and freed all the other animals. We've been out longer than the Gordak we have a couple of dozen prize specimens. Lead by the anthrovacs, they've taken over the ship." "Now you're joking," Teejay told him. "They're all brainless, those creatures, except for the anthrovacs." "They were brainless. Captain Moore. But not now. Now they behave logically, with a purpose, and they've taken over the Frank Buck from stem to stern -- all except those animals that need a special sort of atmosphere to breathe, and they've remained in their bubbles. "Otherwise, the animals took over. And I suppose you can imagine -- the crew was too astounded to resist, especially since the anthrovacs had gotten hold of neutron guns and seerned to know how to use them. Result -- we've all been disarmed, we're prisoners aboard our own ship, and bound for I don't know where." "Sounds crazy to me," Teejay said, and stalked toward the door. Steve took a quick step after her, but Barling held him back. "Let her find out for herself, Stedman. Then maybe we can talk sense." Teejay opened the door, stepped out into the corridor. Tensely, Steve waited, ready to bolt after her at the first indications of trouble. But what he heard was a yelp of surprise from the woman, and then she came running back into the lounge, slamming the door behind her. "A Martian desert cat I" she cried. It didn't do anything; it just stood there, all ten feet of it, looking at me!" "Then you believe me?" Barling demanded. "As I see it, we must have been struck by some cosmic radiation which mutated the animals, and -- " "No," Steve told him bluntly. "That's impossible. First place, any such change would have to be selective. All the animals wouldn't be affected. And more important, mutation takes generations to manifest itself. You never see the change at all in the original creature. Look at . Earth, way back in the early years of atomics. Genes were mutated at those two Island cities -- Nagasaki and, umm-mm, I forget the name of the other. Anyway, Genes were mutated, but it took over two hun. dred years for those mutations to become apparent. See what I mean?" "I do," said Barling. "And that's precisely why I think we ought to fight this thing together. I had an idea, you helped me with it. We can continue like that." "Well," Steve nodded, "we have "a first-class problem on our hands. We can't do anything about it until We know what's going on -- only the mystery's a little deeper than you think. First, I heard a voice out on Ganymede. My brother's voice." "Your brother's?" Barling scratched his head, "Oh, wait a minute! You must mean Charlie Stedman who was killed out here a few years back?" "Yeah, Charlie. You can't hear voices on Ganymiede, but I heard them, inside my head. Also, don't  forget the Ganymede-fear. I'd say the three things will fit together when we begin to learn what's going on." "Provided we can find out," Teejay told him. "You can keep your scientific mysteries for a while, Steve. What I want to know is this: where are we going, and why?" "Ask your desert cat out there." Kevin's laughter was sour. "What we need is a good turn coat," Tee jay assured him. "Someone who can go out among the animals and ask questions. I'm joking, of course, but if anyoi) could do it, it would be that Tat, LeClarc." Steve frowned. "That's not as funny as it sounds. Has anyone seen LeClarc since the fight?" "No!" Kevin slammed fist against palm. , Steve was about to answer, but quite suddenly the lights blinked out. Somewhere outside, a dozen animals roared their fear. Within the lounge, Kevin commenced cursing lustily and an involuntary moan escaped Barling's lips. The darkness was the bleak, utter  black of deep space. Further, Steve realized, the steady humming of the fission engines had erased. Minutes later, impossible pain gripped him and flung him, sobbing to the floor. He'd never felt anything like it, a gripping, grinding, twisting torment which tried to turn him inside out. He heard the others dimly, reeling about the lounge and falling to the floor, and in the darkness someone fell near him. "Steve? Steve, is that you?" Teejay... "Yeah." The pain seemed to come in waves, and Steve gritted his teeth when the second turned out to be worse than the first. He reached out with his hand, found Teejay's and squeezed it. "Hold on, kid. It can't last forever." "It better -- not." When her hand tensed in his, then relaxed, Steve knew she'd fainted. And soon after that, his own senses reeled and deserted him. Teejay's hand was still tightly clenched in his when he regained consciousness. A dozen feet from them, Kevin sat up, shaking his head slowly back and forth. Schuyler Barling lay stretched out on his stomach. "Whatever happened," Kevin growled, "I didn't like it." Tee jay extricated her hand, looked at Steve, smiled. "It's still awful quiet outside." It didn't remain that way for long. As if Teejay's words had been a signal, a voice boomed at them from the wall-rnicrophone. "We have landed. All humans will please file out into the main corridor in an orderly fashion and make their way to the airlock." Schuyler Barling sat up groggily. Tee jay said, "I could swear I know that voice from somewhere. "And I," Kevin told them. "It's familiar, though I can't place it." Steve felt his heart pounding. The voice was Charlie's. T hey stood on a flat, grassy plain which stretched halfway to the horizon and then began to undulate into low hills. And far off, shrouded by purple mists, a range of mountains loomed distantly. Purple mist; a purplish cast to the sky; a fiercely bright blue sun. "What world is this?" said Kevin. The crew of the Frank Buck -- a hundred men -- stood in a long, thin file outside the ship. They'd balked at first, but silently, the three anthrovacs had ferreted them out with their neutron guns, never uttering a sound, merely motioning with the weapons. Of the other animals Steve saw nothing, but within the corridors of the Frank Buck he'd encountered a sand crawler and a desert cat, both dead. The seconds fled, became rninutes. When half an hour had passed, the crew became restless and some of them ambled off on the grassy plain until one of the anthrovacs herded them back. The Frank Buck Exec, a short, wiry man, strode within the ship and came out a few moments later, scratching his head. "I can't understand it," he said. "None of the instruments work. I thought we could just pile back into the ship and blast off, but apparently someone has other ideas." Someone did. Someone came striding across the plain, a small dot of a figure at first. He came closer. Steve ignored the anthrovacs, ran forward. "Charlie!" he cried. "Charlie!" The man was shorter' than Steve, and stockier. His eyes searched Steve's face briefly, and he said: "Should I know you?" "Should you! I'm your brother!" "Interesting, but quite impossible." The words hardly registered, and Steve babbled on, "We thought you were dead. It was Tee jay here who reported back to Earth saying you'd died on Ganymede. Now you're alive and -- " Abruptly he whirled, turned to Teejay. "You lied, damn you! Here's Charlie, see? Charlie was never dead. But you said -- " "I said Charlie was dead." The woman met his gaze levelly. "He was. I know a dead man when I see one. He was dead." "But -- " "But nothing. I don't' know who this is. I can't explain it. That has nothing to do with what happened on Ganymede years ago." "Yes? Then what did happen? Why did Charlie write once that you must have been spawned in hell? You never did want to tell me what happened on Ganymede, did you? Maybe Charlie can." "That is my name, Charlie Stedman. It is the name this body has always had, although when I do not inhabit it I assure you I am not Charlie Stedman," the stocky man said. "You see, the original inhabitant of the garment -- the body -- was destroyed. The name applied to the body as well as the inhabiting mind. The language remained engraved in the brain cells, and impersonal parts of the memory, too. In that sense, I am Charlie Stedman. Does it satisfy you?" "Hell, no," said Steve, bewildered. Mystery had been piled upon mystery, with no solution in sight And grim confusion turned to grimmer anger as he faced Tee jay once more. "All right, strt talking. Just how did you find Charlie? And what made him hate you like that? Talk, damn you!" "Okay, I will. But I don't know why Charlie hated me, and that's the truth. I only met him once or twice and -- unless it was Schuyler here. Hey, Schuyler!" Barling joined them. "Wlat do you want?!' "Answer this question: do you make a practise of poisoning the minds of your crew against me?" "Well, I don't know what you mean by poi -- " Teejay grabbed a handful of his shirt and twisted, constricting the collar about his throat. "Answer me," she said. "And no run around." "I -- I guess so. It's only business. Captain Moore. The more they hated you, the more they'd be willing to fight you in the hunt every step of the way." "How about Charlie Stedman?" "I don't remember. Probably, it was like that." Teejay flung him away from her. "Does that satisfy you, Steve?" "For that part, yes. But what about the rest of it?" "Not much to tell. I was out alone on Ganymede, a few miles from the ship. I thought I heard voices, sort of inside my head. I went forward to explore, just like you did, and also like you, I almost didn't have enough air to get back. Especially since I found your brother on the way." "And he was dead?" As he spoke, Steve looked at his brother, standing right there in front of him, and wondered if anyone ever asked a more impossible question. "Yes. He was dead. I don't know how he died, but I placed my ear against the chest of his vac-suit. The heart-beat is amplified through it, you know. But there wasn't any. After that, I ran back to the Gordak, and I had barely enough air to make it. I reported Charlie's death, of course." Charlie's death. Well, she sounded sincere. But there was Charlie, standing two paces to her right and apparently listening to an account of his own demise, a throat. Quite evidently, it ' wasn't Charlie at all, but Steve could think of the man in no other way, for down to the smallest physical detail, he was Charlie. "That will suffice," he said. Again, it was Charlie's voice, but expressionless. "Enough of bickering. You will all march with me toward those hills, and We have a long journey before sunset." The nine-foot anthrovacs took up their positions one on each side of the column and one behind it, and no one disobeyed. Once Steve looked back over his shoulder and saw the purple mists had almost completely swallowed the Frank Buck. Then the irony of the situation struck Steve and he smiled -- almost. He'd come to Ganymede after anthrovacs. But he'd left the satellite under an anthrovac guard! Fine thing. A mighty hunter was he! Clear across the universe to be bagged by his own game! Obviously, Steve thought as they marched on, the blue day-star was not Earth's stm. Somehow, in a matter of moments, they'd left the Solar System entirely. He knew that theories had been advanced about traveling through something called sub-space, something which could make flight to the farthest stars almost instantaneous, since sub-space existed outside the space-time continuum. And that wrenching from one spatial plane to another might explain the tremendous pain they'd undergone, too. But surely the Frank Buck had never been equipped for such flight. The whole concept of sub-space flight was strictly theoretical and hadn't even reached the drawing-board stage. Then how had it happened? Kevin had some vague, halfformed ideas on the subject, and he letSteve know about them. "It's a puzzler, boy. They took us a long way, space alone knows how far. I don't pretend to know why; we can't figure that out, not yet. But I know this : they could not have done that without help. Someone had to bring the ship." "The anthrovacs?" Steve suggested. "Not the anthrovacs. For all their handling neutron guns and taking the Frank Buck over, they're just big apes to me. Maybe they were able to take the ship off Ganymede, but no more than that. They had help, boy, and from the inside "Who? Who do you mean?" "I'm not sure I know. But look at it this way. The Gordak wasn't taken, the Frank was. Why? I'll tell you why, or at least I'll tell you one possibility, There were scores of men on each ship, but while the Gordak had only one animal -- the stone worm you got on Mercury -- the Frank Buck had dozens. All right so far, boy? Well, here's what I think: whoever took the ship wanted both men and ani , mals "I still don't understand." "I'm not sure I do, either. Let's get back a little.' The Frank Buck, not the Gordak, was taken. Strange, isn't it, that just before that happened LeClarc bolted our ranks and joined the enemy! Does that mean LeClarc had to be on the Frank Buck before anything happened? And whcre'd he get to, anyway? I haven't seen him since the fight ; I don't think anyone has. Now, a man spends years idolizing a woman -- I've been around, and I think I told you LeClarc would have done anything for Captain Moore. Suddenly, he gets sulky because he's out of favor with her, and decides on a double-cross. "It smells bad, boy. Sure, he was sulky, but the LeClarc I knew would have come crawling to Captain Moore, anyway. This one didn't." Kevin paused, ran a hand through his red hair. "Maybe it means he isn't the same man. Maybe it means he's something like that thing which calls itself your brother. That's not Charlie Stedrnan and you know it. Trouble is, boy, you can't admit it to yourself." "I won't argue about it," Steve replied. "But you're off the beam there. Charlie doesn't remember me, but LeClarc's memory seemed fine." "That's true, Steve. I can't explain it, except like this: whatever happened to both of them, we don't know a thing about it. Maybe it works in a different way on differ ent people. Maybe because Charlie was dead first, his personal memories were a loss, but LeClarc's weren't because he might have been possessed alive." "Possessed?" "Yes, possessed. Oh, not by spirits, that's for sure. But possessed nevertheless. I won't say the anthrovacs were possessed, for we don't know enough about them to begin with. But look at those other animals now, the ones that died. You won't deny that something took over their brains?" "Damned right I won't. But I still don't see how it all adds up." "Nor do I," said Kevin. "Unfortunately, the brutes seemed to have perished in transit from Ganymede to here, wherever here is. It could be that the strain on their brain-tissue, with sentience and intelligence taking over where before only sentience had resided, was too great." Kevin paused, then concluded: "whatever the reason, whatever the reason for alLof it -- I think you'll find LeClarc knows all about it." The blue sun had neared the horizon and the purple mists had ney's end. It was then that they saw LeClarc. T he column of men had traversed the grassy plain, had climbed steadily through the region of undulating hills. And suddenly, hidden until the last moment by a rise in the terrain and spread out at the foot of the higher mountains, they saw a city. Circular, walled, pleasantly pastel-tinted despite the purple gloom, it lay before them, lights which might or might not have been electricity winking on to dispel the gathering darkness. And there, at the city's gateway, stood LeClarc. LeClarc -- and not LeClarc, The man seemed as much LeClarc as the short stocky figure who led the procession seemed Charlie ) Stedraan. "Welcome to Uashalume," he said, and Steve pulled up short at the sound of his voice. There was something of the volatile Frenchman in it, but something else which was alien. "You will be billeted in temporary quarters for the night," LeClarc continued. "You will of course have no need for such quarters after tomorrow's bazaar." "Of course, my foot!" Teejay cried petulantly. "See here, LeClarc, we've been getting orders and directives without knowing what they mean or why they were given or -- "Must you be so impatient?" LeClarc's smile was almost devoid of mirth. "You've come one hxmdred thousand light years, and surely you can wait until morning." "Light years!" This was Steve. And Kevin, "One hundred thousand!" The academic problem didn't bother Teejay as much as the human one. She said, defiantly, "What he needs is a good swift kick." LeClarc failed to wait for that, or anything else. Chuckling, he led the first anthrovac through the higharched stone gateway and the other two creatures herded the humans in after him. Charlie -- although obviously, the man was not Charlie -- went on ahead with LeClarc, and Steve had to restrain Teejay with a few terse words. The purple mists cloaked the city completely now, and as they plodded along a wide roadway, Steve half-saw figures watching them from the darkness. He could not make the figures out, however, and he heard nothing but the sounds their feet made on the stone roadway. Presently, they came to a smaller, divergent path which led back to the base of the wall. Here, in deepest shadow, was their destination -- a squat, rectangular building carved from stone. A gate creaked and clanged open before them; they streamed through, weary after hours of forced mardi; the gate clanged resoundingly behind them. Charlie tad not entered with them, nor LeClarc, nor the anthrovacs. It took Steve only a moment to discover the gate had been securely fastened from the outside. "I guess we bed down here for the night," he said, grinning ruefully. Teejay shrugged, wrapped the black cape tightly about her. It was cold and damp in the one large chamber which took up the interior of the building. In the center of the place stood a stone table, and on it a gas lamp which flickered and spluttered and cast grotesque shadows as the men wandered about. There were no beds, no furniture of any sort except for the table. And the two small peep-hole windows were fifteen or more feet off the ground. The crew of the Frank Buck gathered in small, anxious knots and whispered grimly among themselves. After a time, men circulated between one group and another, and finally one of them, evidently designated as spokesman for the rest, approached Schuyler Barling. He seemed nervous, frightened, unsure of himself. "Captain Barling, my name's Steiner, and the  fellows thought that -- well, that I might speak for them. We don't know what's going on, but we do know this much: we don't like it." "I can't blame you," said Barling. "Point is, sir, we want you to do something about it." "Eh? Me? What can I do?" "We don't know that, sir. But a spaceman's a peculiar individual; some say he's got characteristics you won't find elsewhere, and one of them is this : he has complete confidence in his captain." "Why, thank you, Steiner." "Me, I work in fission. I like to have that confidence and the rest of the men, they like to have it too. When they lose it, they're kind of at a loss. We don't want to think we've lost it here, sir." "What do you want me to do?" Barling was restless, .fidgety, twisting his hands together, "Lead us, sir. Tell us you can get us out of here. Tell us we must be prepared to fight behind you and maybe to die, but lead us." "But how can you expect me to lead you when I don't know what's happening? How can I plan for escape when I don't know what it is we have to escape from?" "There's talk among the mfen, sir," Steiner wfeiit on, "Some of them are for you, although V be frank. There aren't many, sir. But they need a leader, all of them agree on that. What they want to know IS this: are you their man?" Barling squared his thin shoulders arrogantly. "Tm the Frank Bucks Captain." "The Frank Buck lies behind u in those purple mists, sir. Could you find it? Finding it, OOuld yOU make it run again?" "I dont know." "Then the fact that you captain the Frank Buck doesn't mean much. We've decided that leaves us without a leader, sir. We need a leader." Barling smiled coldly. "Are you trying to tell me the men have selected you?" "No, sir. I'm not. But the "majority of the men have their choice -- and that is Captain Moore. We who have been with the Frank Buck longest have heard a' lot of bad talk about Captain Moore, but that changes completely whenever we make planetfall. The talk in all the frontier towns is all in Captain Moore's favor. When there are decisions to be made, sir, we'd like her to make them." "A woman? When all your lives may be at stake?" who'd fared SO poorly in the lounge fight strode forward, saying: "Look at yourself, sir. You're beaten and battered, and that's Captain Moore's work. Did her sex matter then?" Barling reddened, said nothing. "We have a pressing need for a leader," Steiner continued. "Our behavior cannot be chaotic. The leader must plan for us, and we must be prepared to carry out those plans with no hesitation. We must have faith in our leader." Tee jay joined them, grinning. "Thank you, Mr. Steiner. There was a time not long ago when what you've just finished saying would have meant more to me than anything. Literally, more than anything. But would you' think it strange if you hear that I don't think that now?" "What do you mean?" Steiner demanded. "I'm a ' twenty-second century female, strong as a man and proud of it. Too proud, Mr. Steiner, for I've spent my whole life trying to prove it. Plenty of men have cursed me for it, I'll bet, and I guess they were right. "So I don't want that job you offer. It took a kind of free-for-all brawl to make me realize it, but a woman's still a woman, and that's One thing I had to learn. I fought your Captain Barling and I beat him. Probably, I could do it againy But I -- well, I was fighting with Captain Barling and saying to myself all tlie time, 'This is stupid. What are you -- a girl-- -- doing this for? Don't you know you shouldn't go around fighting like a man?' " Steve noticed in the dim light that Teejay had begun to blush. "I hate to bate my life before you like this, Mr. Steiner, but the way it adds up I've suddenly found Tve had enough of fighting and galavanting around. So the answer is no: I won't be your captain. The way I feel now, I can't be." "Where does that leave us?" Steiner asked her sullenly. "We don't think Captain Barling can do the job, whatever the job turns out to be. It's one thing to serve on a largely automatic ship under Captain Barling, but another thing to have to take his orders here -- wherever we are." "May I make a Suggestion?" Tee jay asked. And, after Steiner nodded and most of the men grumbled their assent: "There are two men here who can lead us the way we should be led. One is Kevin McCann, Exec of the Gordak; the other is Steve Stedman." A stir of surprise passed among the men. It was one thing to offer their allegiance to the Captain of another ship -- and an unusual thing at that -- but quite another to offer it to a couple of men they hardly knew. The men began heated discussions once more, louder this time, and Teejay drew Steve off into a comer. "Does that surprise you?" "It sure does, Teejay. On both counts. But I'll tell you this : I think I could like you a lot better in your new role, and -- Teejay?" "What?" Hr voice was soft and he felt her hand snuggle into his. "I -- I like you plenty right now." He slid his arms around her waist, drew her toward him, one small part of his mind expecting a roundhouse right-handed wallop from the old Teejay. But she merely sighed contentedly and slipped her arms, around his neck. He kissed her -- tentatively at first -- then long and deep, and Teejay's eyes were all aglow when he finished. "You lug," she said, "if you didn't do something like that, and soon, I was going to be an Amazon just once more to make you do it." Someone -- Steve saw it was Steiner -- stood before them clearing his throat. "Captain Moore?" "Yes?" Teejay hardly saw him. "The men have decided to accept your recommendation. McCann antd Stedman it is. Captain Moore. They bark and we'll jump. And we'll be hoping something comes of it." "If it's at all possible, they'll get us out of here," Teejay predicted, and squeezed Steve's hand. "Any orders, sir?" Steiner looked at Steve. "Umm-mm, no. Except that we'd like to have this corner to ourselves for a while."  "Done," said Steiner, smiling and striding away. "I have one order," Kevin called out loudly, and silence fell on the room quite abruptly. "Let's all get the hell to sleep before we're too tired to do anything when morning comes." in through the two small windows, bringing strange bird-sounds with it. Steve was stiff and chilled and he'd slept badly on the hard stone floor. The groans and frowns all around the room showed him he wasn't the only one. Teejay slept like a baby, the cape wrapped about her, and she didn't arise until one of the men began to bang on the ktone and metal door. "Is it morning?" said Teejay, coming into Steve's aims almost before she was fully awake. "I had the nicest dreams darling!" Abruptly, Steve whirled away from her. The door had begun to creak in ponderously on little-used hinges. An anthrovac bent and came within the chamber, bearing a bath-tub-sized bowl of what looked like hot, steaming cereal. It was deposited near the table, along with a dozen or so stone spoons. Foolishly, one of the men darted for the doorway. Reaching out with a long, hairy arm, the anthrovac scooped him up by the scruff of the neck and flung him back inside. He got to his feet with a nasty gash on his  forehead which Teejay bandaged with a strip of cloth ripped from the hem of her black cape. The spoons were passed around after that, and the men of the Frank Buck dug into the gruel with gustof It had been fifteen hours since any of them had eaten and surprisingly, the gruel turned out to be quite palatable, with an appealing, nutlike flavor. The anthrovac waited fifteen minutes, then lifted the huge bowl and departed with it. But the door didn't close fully. Charlie Stedman came through it. "Good morning," he said. "We're a little late, and we'll have to hurry if we want to reach the bazaar in time for opening." "Are you sure We want to?" Kevin demanded sarcastically. And Steiner suggested: "Maybe you'd like to answer a few questions first." "Sure." This was Teejay. "About a thousand questions." It was as if the man hadn't heard them at all. "Outside a vehicle awaits you. There is room for all, provided each man occupies qne of the squares you will find marked off on the floor. Let's go." Angry, sullen, but still thoroughly bewildered, the men trooped outside. The, vehicle was a sort of bus, although the noise of a gasoline engine or the purring of a fission engine wpuld have shocked Steve here on the world called Uashalume. As it turned out, the bus started with a whining whistle which quickly climbed to the super sortie and faded beyond the level human ears could reach. Within the Vehicle there were no seats, but the floor had been divided into tworfoot squares, a thin white line marking off each box. When each man had occupied his square, the bus slipped away from the Squat building and was soon streaking down the roadway at a good clip. Steve saw other buildings, most of them squat and shapeless. And now, with the coming of daylight, he could see some of the inhabitants of Uashalume. He'd steeled himself for it. He hadn't expected human beings. Any variety of six-legged, multi-tentacled, bug-eyed creatures would have been strictly in order. He gasped. He got more than he bargained for. Hardly two of the creatures gazing in at them were alike! The differences were not those you might expect to find among the members of a particular species. The differences were extreme, A furry thing hovered alongside the openwindowed 'bus on six gauzelike wings.  Multiple eyes stared up at them out of a pool of amorphous protoplasm. A bony, stickdike creature with four arms and one Cyclopean eye covering almost its entire head peered at them. An ecto-skeletoned monstrosity made clicking noises as they passed. Big horrors and little horrors. Steve found himself laughing harshly. What did all his knowledge of Extra-terrestrial zoology amount to now? Extra-terrestrial -- that meant the Solar System, one tiny, inconsequential corner of a great galaxy. But here, here on Uashalume, denizens of a hundred Solar Systems might have been gathered. Why? Such utterly different creatures -- each conforming to a particular environmental niche -- would not be found together. Unless someone had probed the depths of space for life-forms that might all be capable of surviving bn Uashalume, as, indeed, humans could survive there! But why? The question returned, taunted him. Again, such a gathering wouldn't be out of direct choice. If each of the creatures seemed so completely strange, so horrible, so ludicrous to human eyes -- they probably appeared that way to one another as well. Steve wondered how some of them might describe the obnoxious, featherless, hairless bipeds which walked upright on two limbs and carried two other limbs for more varied purposes than walking. Bipeds which called themselves humans. And that, precisely, was the point. Such a gathering stemmed from no natural cause. Such a gathering had been imposed arbitrarily, but for what purpose? And what, if anything, did the bazaar have to do with it? A bazaar of the worlds, bringing together for trade, creatures of every form and size and color? Steve doubted that somehow, for the bazaar would lack a universal means of exchange, and even if barter were resorted to, how could totally alien life-forms assess the value of completely foreign produce? They couldn't. That left Steve with nothing but a lot of half-formed questions and .no answers at all. He had a hunch he'd begin to get some answers when the bus reached its destination. As with the inhabitants of Uashalume, he was to get more than he bargained for. fusion on a large raised platform under the blue sun. A sea of impossible creatures rolled and seethed on all sides of tliem, shuttereyes, pin-hole eyes, simple lightsensative receptors, multiple-tube eyes -- hundreds of varieties all intent upon them. Steve heard voices around him on the platform, confused, alarmed. "What's happening?" "This place looks like an auction block!" "Look at those creatures, will you?" "Are we for sale or something?" The human voices faded into a meaningless babble. Someone else was speaking, but not aloud. It was like Charlie Stedman's voice, that day on Ganymede. Steve heard it inside his head and this time -- because they all stood about more bewildered than ever -- he knew that the Frank Buck's crew heard it too. "Friends of Uashalume," the voice purred mentally, "here, at opening day of the bazaar, we have a most unusual treat. Most unusual. Two of us, as you know, have already tested the models in question, and we find them entirely satisfactory." Charlie Stedman and LeClarc stepped forward, bowed. "For the rest of you, one hundred choice specimens! We set no fixed price, but let this be said about the new garments. They are unspoiled, virgin material; they've not been used-before. You'll find them stimulating for that reason alone, Fm sure. As for the vital statistics, they vary in height from three and a half to five klars; in weight from fifteen to twenty-nine jarons; they are a bisexual lot, although only one female of the species is present; their intellectual capacity is on the seventh level, their better minds can attain to problems of relativity and universal field ; emotionally, they have twice the range of any previous garment!" The voice paused significantly, permitted that point to sink in. "Yes, twice the range. We none of us have ever experienced such strong, vital  emotions. Can you imagine, twice the emotional range means a new way of life for those among us who select some of these humans for their own. "Now, the auction-master will please step forward." "We are for sale," Steiner gasped. It was Charlie Stedman who came to the fore, climbing the auction-block and looking around him. After a time, he singled out Steiner and pulled the man forward by an elbow. "The first specimen is typical," he droned in English, and Steve figured he spoke mentally to the assembled throngs, reeling off the hdght, weight, and other vital statistics for Steiner. Finally: "What am I bid?" Mental voices sang out, one after another: "Three char!" "Four." "Six." "Ten char." "Ten?" The man who was Chai lie Stedman laughed. "Ten char indeed! One hundred is not enough." The bidding continued, became hot, became a contest between two mental voices. Steiner went for seventy-four char, whatever a char was. They took him down and carted him away, struggling. It looked like an ugly scene would develpp, for a score of men surged toward the front of the block angrily. But some of the creatures held what looked like strange, possibly lethal weapons, and Kevin growled: "Not now! There's no sense getting all of us killed. Relax, and we'll see." Grumbling, the men subsided, and Kevin turned to Steve: "If this isn't the damndest cosmic joke of all." "What do you mean?" "We're hunters, big game hunters. We go out into space to hunt for specimens, only this time we've become specimens ourselves! This time we werent the hunters, but the quarry!" The auction continued, and one by one the men were sold. Once one of them, a radar technician, bolted and ran. He was cut down quite efficiently by one of the handweapons and Charlie Stedman asserted it was a pity one of the specimens had been lost. "Keep your tempers,' Kevin said grimly as a wave of anger washed over the auction block. "I dont like it any more than you do, but we won't fight until we understand -- and then perhaps we'll have a chance." been taken, Charlie Stedman reached for Teejay and dragged her forward. "This,' he said, "is the female of the species. You will notice the long hair atop her head and the twin out-thrust developments of the upper ventral region; these are the marks of distinction. And for two reasons we will demand a special price for the female. "First, we are primarily interested in these humans for emotion. Stronger garments we have, and garments which live longer. But none attain to the human emotional level. And, among the humane, the female is capable of stronger surges of emotion, perhaps because in general she is physically weaker and must compensate for it, although, from what I've seen, this particular specimen is a physical match for the others. "Second, one specific high degree of emotion is possible only when a male and a female are in one another's presence. Therefore, whichever one of you owns the female can be certain of that added stimulus, and, as a consequence, certain of a more satisfactory garment from the emotional point of view. Now, what am I offered?" Teejay went for three hundred chat, Kevin had to circle Steve's body with his huge arms and hold him firm as they took Teejay away. He'd found the woman quite suddenly, and he loved her all the more for it. His potential worst enemy had become his lover. And now, brief hours later she was taken from him, perhaps forever. "Let go of me! Get ydur filthy hands off me. That's Teejay they're taking! Teejay!" "And they'll take you too. But you're going alive, not dead. Stand still and let them get on with this." "Don't you realize what they've been talking about?" Steve shouted his rage. "They'll wear Us, like clothing. They'll get inside our brains and share oUf bodies with us, like they've done with all these other creatures. Did you think these monsters were all native to Uashalume? I wouldn't be surprised if none of them was. They've all been taken, as we have, from their own worlds. They all live hqre-as clothing. Maybe the masters don't have physical form at all, maybe they're just mental essence. "And all they want to do is run the gamut of our emotions. They know how to play with emotions, too. Remember the Ganymede-fear, Kevin?" "I remember, boy." Kevin still held him. "Well, that was their work. Probably, Ganymede was their base in our Solar System, although it's possible they first got into LeClarc's brain on Mercury. And Kevin, all those theories you had were right!" "Yes, I know. And sub-space -- " "The hell with that. They're taking Tee jay and they may take all of us and spread us out all over the face of this world. We'll never find each other. We'll -- " "You're next, Steve Stedman." It was Charlie's voice, and Steve felt Kevin release him with a word of warning, felt himself drawn to the front of the block. Somehow, he found he was incredibly objective as the bidding began. He was claimed for one hundred fifty char and led away by a creature with a stilt-like body and six arms. Or rather, he thought, that was the garment. But the real creature -- the mental entity within it -- had grown tired of last year's cloak, and Steve was to take its place. Moments later, Steve's buyer whisked him away in a smaller version of the bus that had taken the Frank Bucks's crew to the bazaar. On the outskirts of the city, the car stopped. Steve climbed out, followed the stilt-figure up a flight of stairs as a round, fat, furry creature bounced up behind him with a weapon. ' Inside, the place looked like a laboratory. And at the center of the room squatted a great round tank, large enough to hold a man. A green liquid boiled within it, but somehow Steve got the impression of boiling without much heat. He became absorbed in the idea, reached up over the lip of the tank to verify it on a thoroughly peculiar impulse. Something struck him from behind. He staggered to his knees and tried to keep his eyes opened. The hard stone floor slammed against his face as he lost consciousness. could see again, a murky green haze surrounded him. Floating, completely submerged! He felt no desire to breathe. He did not have to breathe at all. It was as if his life had been suspended completely, as if there was no need for his body to carry out its normal functions. But he wasn't dead. He could open his eyes and stare at the green 'liquid, and he could think. And after a time, vague forms appeared outside. He saw the walls of the laboratory and the shining instruments -- through green murk. And he saw something else moving about, a shadowy form. The stiltlike creature? Abruptly, sharp pain lanced from the front of his skull to the back. Briefly. And it did not repeat itself. A voice whispered, "You are struggling. t)o not struggle, for it can only prolong the inevitable. Transfer tsdces time, of course; but the longer it takes the more unpleasant it will be for you." "Go to hell." It was then that the pain came back -- stronger. And something almost physical pushed in at his mind, something ugly, unclean, wet with brought twinges of fright. Like the Ganymede-fear but more intense. "To struggle is useless." ' The wet feeling, like fingers now, fingers which oozed slime, clung to his brain, probed it, bore inward. "Why struggle? I think you will make a good fit." "Go away. Damn you, go away!" "I see the auction-master was right. Emotionally, you are strong." The fingers departed, came back again, more insistent. No longer wet, they were digits of fire now, burning, burning. Steve screamed soundlessly and fainted. When Steve came to, he was outside the tank. He was tired and did not feel like walking. Nevertheless,  he walked. At first he did not understand. He thought: I will sit down and rest. His body failed to obey, continued walking. "We share this body," the voice Whispered to him, within his skull. "You are merely an observer as long as I am awake. I am in control. Henceforth, I dwell in this body." "I want to sleep." "You will learn that your mind can sleep while your body does not. And the body interests me, human. The body is capable of strong emotion. I want to feel that emotion." The place, Steve realized later, was a sort of proving-grounds. He felt himself walking, walking. He reached the edge of a cliff, stared down from giddy heights. He felt himself tetering on the edge, saw jagged rocks far below him. He jumped. He did not want to, but he jumped. "We'll be killed!" he cried, iey fear making his heart pound. "That is fear," said the voice in his skull. "That is wonderful fear. So strong -- " Something cushioned their fall, slowly. It was that, Steve knew. Their fall, not his alone. Eor the creature shared it with him. He tumbled, but slowly, like a feather, like a wraith of fog. He alighted on the rocks with hardly a jar, cushioned by some advanced application of a force-field. A large cube of metal was there to convey them to the top once more. After that, he became giddy. He did not know why, but the impulse to laugh Was too strong to resist. He laughed until it grew painful, laughed until the tears came to his eyes. "That is joy," said the voice. "I can instill joy in you. But the way you express it, that is unique. More!" And Steve's laughter bubbled up insanely again. The creature was wrong -- not joy. Hysteria, more nearly. Unused to emotions, the creature could not tell them apart. Something grabbed his arms and held itA giant vise which could crush and twist. Me saw nothing, realized that it was some mental trick--but thoroughly effective. His arm was being wrenched from its socket, slowly, terribly. He clenched his teeth, groaned. From somewhere far off, tne voice laughed calmly. "I like that. Oh yes, I do. I like your reaction to pain," An intense loathing he had never before experienced took hold of him. At first he thought it was another trick, but he could sense alarm in the creature which shared him. The loathing, then, was his body's reaction to its parasite. Almost, he could feel the creature squirming, and he gave free reign to the emotion. "Stop!" The voice was strident, alarmed. I hate you, Steve thought intensely. I hate you, "Stop! I warn you, you will kill us with that, or drive us insane." Vertigo followed the loathing as the creature fought back. Steve was tired, suddenly more tired than he'd ever been. He sank back into blackness, knew even as his senses fled that his mind alone would sleep, not his body. With two minds, the body would not sleep at all -- and in a matter of months it would perish of fatigue. But the creature within him feared his hatred, and that he must remember. T he days followed each other in a slow, tortuous procession. Nothing seemed to satiate the parasite, for each day it strove for new emotions, and after a time Steve learned he could frustrate it by regarding everything as unreal, imaginative, non-existent. Sometimes, the guest slept when the host did not. At such times, Steve found, he had freedom of a sort. His field of action was not circumscribed in any way except that violent activity would awaken the parasite. Steve toyed with his freedom, timorously at first, then grew more confident. He played with it, basked in it after steady days of control. He even discovered he could use the telepathic abilities of his uninvited mental guest. He missed Teejay, wondered about her, longed for her. His astonishment was so extreme when he first heard her voice within hisead that he almost awakened the parasite. "Steve? Steve, is that you?" "Teejay -- " "I've been trying to reach you. When these creatures sleep, we can use their minds." "Then you're all right?" "I'm as all right as can be expected, Steve, But they've been running me through all sorts of emotional mazes. My clothing is torn and they don't care about it. My skin is torn and bruised. They don't care about that, either. They'll run us down. Did you notice all the other creatures here? Some of their bones are broken -- if they have bones -- and they've never been set. They're bruised and bloody and infected and the parasites don't care! Why should they, they can get new bodies? But Steve -- oh, Steve, I've never felt so unclean in all my life and it's just as if I've been defiled and -- " "Take it easy, Teejay. Thinking like that won't help." "I hate them. Oh, I hate them. I -- " "Listen. I want you to concentrate like that. Hate weakens them. Remember how the animals aboard the Frank BucA: died? Well, since our emotions are so much stronger than the parasites, maybe, maybe -- "  "You mean it could work in reverse "I don't know." "You want me to try, darling?" "Yes -- no! We can't do it now. If it works, we'd still be leaving a hundred men here. They're doomed. Tee jay. We're all doomed unless we can do something about it, and soon. But at night they sleep. Yeah, they sleep at night! If we can contact the others, and make a concentrated effort of it, using the telepathic powers of the parasites -- " ''Shh! That's enough, Steve. My friend here is getting up. I can feel him stirring inside my head. Shh, later!" At the end, hope had made Teejay her old spunky self again. But when Steve's own master awakened,that hope seemed mightly slim indeed. Each night they managed to contact two or three of the others, and the word was supposed to be passed on. Finally, it was arranged. The night for action was decided upouj and for some few of them it would be a gamble, for there was no guarantee that all the parasites would be asleep. Once the attempt was made, however, there would be no turning back. Whoever was left behind -- was left behind. Provided the plan worked at all. T he creature was asleep again. 'T hate ycAi," Steve said quietly. Silence. hate youf He thought it now, thought it with all his being -- and somehow he could sense the thought was being reinforced as scores of men concentrated on it around the city. The mind within him stirred sluggishly, but he ushed it under again. Hate, hate, ate. Hadn't the creature said it could kill them both? A gamble. Everything was a gamble. Naturally the parasite would say that, Steve began to sweat, physically. He was weak and the muscles of his arms and legs trembled. His mind found the strange telepathic channel of the parasite, traveled inward along it -- with hatred. That, at least, was easy. He did hate the creature so thoroughly and so completely that the feeling pushed everything else from his mind. A concert of hatred, all over the city. And slumbering masters who might or, might not awaken. "Stop!" A clarion command inside his skull. The parasite was fighting back. Steve tumbled to the floor, lay there writhing. Two minds fought for control of his body, and he was being pushed back and out of control. He got to his feet stiffly, strode to a cabinet, took out a knife. He stared at the knife,  fascinated, pointed it toward his chest. "One of us must die, human, but it shall not be I!" He drove the knife inward, slowly, an inch at a time toward his chest. He felt the point sting, saw a thin trickle of blood. For a moment, he fought to possess his arms and the knife with them. That was a mistake -- almost, a fatal one. The parasite wanted that, for, in such a battle, it would win everytime. Perhaps it could not fight his hatred, but it could fight anything else he had to offer. The knife went in, scraped against a rib. Steve yelled hoarsely, drenched every atom of his soul in hatred. Slowly, he withdrew the knife, watched bright red blood well up aifter it. Something tugged at his mind, slipped away -- first scalding, then wet. It oozed out, and pain blurred Steve's vision as he tumbled to the floor again. When he got up moments later and managed to staunch the flow of blood, he knew the parasite had perished. near the city gate -- grim and weary, most of them with fresh wounds. Steve's joy was an emotion the dead parasite would have loved to share when he saw Teej ay among the sixty. Kevin was there too, and Steiner. Surprisingly, Schuyler Barling seemed more sprightly than the rest. "LeClarc?" Steve demanded. "He was the first," said Kevin. "Stronger control, perhaps. He's among those who could not make it." "Maybe they're still alive." "No," Teejay told him. "I saw three men die, horribly. Most of the others probably did, too." "Don't you see, boy, we can't chance survival for all of us to seek out one or two who might still be alive! It wouldn't be fair." Kevin shook his head grimly. Steve knew he was right. He was far too exhausted to argue, anyway. "Then we'll go as we are?" "Well, there are half a dozen others in the gate-house now, forcing information from some of the hosts." "What information?" "About sub-space, boy. A hunter named McSweeney was possessed by a scientist of sorts, and he learned the sub-space gear is a compact little device which a man can carry. They store a few dozen of 'em in the gate-house, and -- hello!" Half a dozen men emerged from the stone structure, and one of them fell as a beam of energy seared out and caught him. A variety of creatures streamed out after them, triggering strange weapons. Soon the fighting became general, and it looked for a time as though the humans -- without weapons of any sort -- would be slaughtered. But Steve grabbed one of the stilt-creatures, twisted its neck quickly, heard a sharp cracking sound. The creature fell and Steve plunged down with it, coming up with the handweapon and firing into the ranks that bore down upon them. As others of the aliens fell, men retrieved their weapons, fighting back with eyer-increased firepower, although their numbers were decreasing. And battling thus, they broke through the gate and out among the purple-misted hills. Hissing beams of energy emitted sufficient light to see by, and Kevin's voice could be heard roaring above the sounds of fighting: "Stick together! If a man's lost in this purple fdg, he's done for! Stick together!" It was a nightmare. Steve fought shoulder to shoulder with Teejay. Now that he'd been reunited with her, there'd be no more separation, he vowed silently. Not unless he died here on the purple world. Energy beams crossed back and forth as the men retreated, stumbling and darting among the little hillocks. Time lost its normally rigid control. Hours might have been minutes, or the other way around. Time became utterly subjective, with each man living in his own particular continuum. For Steve it seemed at least a short version of eternity until they reached the Frank Buck, And when they did, dawn was streaking the horizon with pale blue radiance, casting a deep purple shadow from the ship to where they fought. It was Kevin who reached the airlock first, Kevin who sprung it open. Two by two they filed in, still facing the aliens and firing their weapons. At the last moment -- when fully half of those who remained had entered the ship -- the three anthrovacs appeared, came loping across the plain toward them. Steve cut the first one down and drew careful aim on the second. It wasn't necessary. The third anthrovac abruptly turned on its fellow and sent it reeling, senseless, with one blow. In the confusion, its parasite must have been careless, must have relaxed its control. The anthrovac, which made a habit of miming men, whirled and began to wreck havoc among the pursuers. It helped turn the tide of battle, and with Steve and Teejay, it was the last to enter the ship.L Kevin said grimly. "There are twentytwo who survived." They all sat about, nursing their wounds. The ship had flung itself through hyper-space, now hovered "You're wrong. There are twentythree." It was Charlie Stedman. In the darkness and confusion, he'd managed to fight his way back with them. But why? "Charlie!" Steve forgot the question. "You're free too." Charlie lifted a neutron gun. "No. You're wrong. None of us is free. You'll find a ship has followed you Jiere. And you're going to follow it back." Of course, Steve thought dully. Charlie was dead. Charlie could hot return as himself. But they were right back where they started from, for the creature who was Charlie could force their return. Kevin stood near the viewport, spoke grimly. "He's not lying. There's a ship out there." Schuyler Barling smiled coldly, took up his position near Charlie. "You all rejected my command once," he said. "You shouldn't have. I had no desire to come back to Earth like that. I've also learned that I can share my body on an equal basis with my master, something none of you would consider. Now we'll take you back." Almost eighty men had died -- for nothing. Steve held Teejay's hand briefly, released it. One life more wouldn't matter, and if there were a chance... "Charlie, don't you remember anything?" "What should I remember?" "I'm your brother." "That much I knew vyhen I called you on Ganymede. But there are no emotional ties. Keep back!" Steve took a step toward him. "You're my brother, and you wouldn't kill me. You can't." It was wild, impossible, and he knew it. The creature was not his brother, had not been his brother for years. Yet if some small vestige of his brother's emotional memories remained -- "Keep back, I warn you!" Steve could see the finger tightening on the trigger when he dove. His shoulder jarred Charlie's knees, and they went dwn together, rolling over and over on the floor... The neutron gun hissed once, between them, and Charlie relaxed. A smile tugged at the comers of his mouth for a moment, and he said, "Steve." He died that way, with the smile still on his lips.  Schuyler Barling was, laughing and screaming, froth flecking his chin. The delicate balance between parasite and host had been entangled, possibly beyond repair. Neither could dominate, and the result was a hopeless, gibbering hulk of a man. "Poor devil," said Kevin. "He'll get psychiatric treatment on Earth, if that will help." Steve crossed to the airlock, climbed into a spacesuit. "What the hell do you think you're doing?" Teejay wanted to know. "You're forgetting about the bther ship. We haven't got a blasting cannon on the Frank Buck, and there isn't one down on the Gordak, either. But with no absorbing medium in space, one of these neutron guns can be a potent weapon." Steve clamped the fishbowl helmet down over his head and activated the airlock. Soon he stood outside, with nothing but space on three sides of him. On the fourth, his magnetic boots gripped the Frank Bucks steeloid hull as he set himself, ready to fire the small hand gun. Energy flared brightly from its muzzle, and the other ship, a slim, sinister shape miles off in the void, flared up with it and dissolved in a shower of sparks and mist. But the neutron gun had a kick which dislodged Steve from the hull and sent him spinning off into space. Through the lockport, no more than four feet away, he saw Kevin donning a vac-suit. The big Exec reached out to grab him but his arm fell a full foot short. All at once, Kevin was dwarfed by the anthrovac as the big animal joined him, scratching its head as Kevin reached out hopelessly iilto space. The gap was increasing. Did the anthrovac understand? No, Steve thought; an anthrovac could ,no more understand than a parrot could actually talk. But like a parrot, an anthrovac could mimic. A huge hairy arm reached out into space, the hand locking on Steve's gauntleted fist. He was drawn back into the Frank Buck and to safety, and it was many minutes before they could stop the anthrovac from probing out experimentally into empty space. Teejay and Kevin later, "I think at the last minute my brother understood." "It looked that way to me, boy," Kevin nodded. "So he died happy. But there's a lot of work for Earth to do. We'll have to clear the System of anything that remains here of Uashalume's power. And then maybe someday we'll have to get up an expedition and clean out that foul place." "One good thing came from it," Steve told them. "We've got subspace drive now, and the stars are ours." He lit a cigarette, frowning. "But I think we ought to go easy on our game-hunting, and you can tell that to Brody Carmical or anyone else, Tee jay. Those, creatures out there were hunters too, you know." "Forget about the past, will you?" Teejay snapped at him, then A chat with the editor... Continued from page # pleasant little town called Patterson -- New York, not New Jersey -- so I spend quite a little time on the road between points. About a week after our first issue hit the stands, I drove up to Kingston wistfully hoping there' d be a couple of dozen letters from fans and friends wishing us success. Well, a dozen, maybe, or at least a few postcards. I got into the office and asked Miss Bogert, our gal MondayFriday, "What's with the IF correspondence?" "Over there," she said, pointing. I looked but all I could see was an old dirty canvas sack. grinned when he looked hurt. "I still feel unclean, Steve. I'd love to sit in a hot bath for about twentyfour hours straight." Steve grinned back. "If we were married, I could scrub around your shoulder-blades for you." Kevin cleared his throat ominously. "They made me Captain of this ship, didn't they. What are we waiting for?" The ceremony was brief, and after it, Steve and Teejay hustled back to the recreation rooms and swimming pools with a bar of strong soap, a couple of washcloths, and a lot of pleasant ideas. "Come again." "In the bag." "In the hagr It rocked me back on my heels. Mail for IF, loaded into a big canvas sack and brought over' personally by Uncle Sam. I had never befoie in my life gotten mail the same way Sears Roebuck gets it. The thrill was memorable. The total figure for the first nine days on the newsstands was six hundred and twentyfour letters and cards. This, according to our very able distributors, is much better than completely satisfactory and slightly less than phenomenal. I was plenty embarrassed because I'd reserved only two pages for our letter column. From now on, much more space will be allocated. Continued on page # Only one question seemed important in this huge space venture: Who was flying where? Welcome, Martians! By S. A. Lombino T he only sound was the swish of the jets against the sand as the big ship came down. Slowly, nose pointed skyward, a yellow tail streaming out behind the tubes, it settled to the ground like a cat nuzzling its haunches against a velvet pillow. Dave Langley peered through the viewport. "I feel kind of funny," he said. A tremor of excitement flooded through Gal Manners' thin frame. "Mars," he whispered. "We made it." Gently, the fins probed the sand, poking into it. Cal cut the power and the big ship shuddered and relaxed, a huge metal spider with a conical head. Gal peered through the viewport, his eyes scanning the planet. Behind him, Dave shrugged into a space suit, gathered up his instruments. "I'll make the tests," Dave said. "Keep the starboard guns trained on me." Cal nodded. He walked Dave to the airlock and lifted the toggles on the inner hatch. Dave stepped into the small chamber, and Cal snapped the hatch shut. He walked quickly to the starboard guns, wiggled into the plastic seat behind them and pitched his shoulders against the braces. Outside, like a grotesque balloon, Dave stumbled around on weighted feet, taking his readings. Whafs out there? Cal wondered. Just exactly what? He tightened his grip on the big blasters, and trained the guns around to where Dave puttered in the sand. Dave suddenly stood' erect, waved at Cal, and started lumbering back toward the ship. Gal left the guns and went to the airlock. He stepped into the chamber closed the toggles on the hatch behind him, and twirled the wheel on the outer hatch. He was ready to move back into the ship again when Dave stepped through the outer hatch, his helpiet under his arm. "It's okay, Gal. Breathable atmosphere. And the pressure is all right, too." Gal let out a sigh of relief. "Gome on." he said. "Get out of that monkey suit. Then we'll claim the planet for Earth." They went back into the ship, and Dave took off the suit, hanging it carefully in its locker. Both men strapped on holsters and drew stun guns from the munitions locker. They checked the charges in their weapons, bolstered them, and stepped out into the Martian night. It was cold, but their clothing was warm and the air was invigorating. Gal looked up at the sky. "Phobos," he said, pointing. "And Deimos," Dave added. "Ike and Mike." "Yeah." Dave smiled. "How do you feel, Dave?" Gal asked suddenly. "How do you mean?" "Mars. I mean, we're the first men to land on Mars. The first, Dave!" They were walking aimlessly. In no particular hurry. "It's funny," Dave said. "I told you before. I feel kind of -- " almost exploded into being, tore through the silence of the planet like the strident scream of a wounded animal. Trumpets blasted raucously, trombones moaned and slid, bass drums pounded a steady tattoo. Tubas, heavy and solemn like old men belching. Glarinets, shrill and squealing. Gymbals clashing. A military band blaring its march into the night. "Wha -- " Dave's mouth hung open. He stared into the distance. There were lights, and the brass gleamed dully. A group of men were marching toward them, blowbanners in the air. "People," Gal said. "And music. Like ours. Music just like ours' The procession spilled across the sand like an unravelling spool of brightly colored silk. Ghildren danced on the outskirts of the group, hopping up and down, screaming in glee. Women waved banners, sang along with the band. And the music shouted out across the sand, a triumphal march with a lively beat. A fat man led the procession. He was beaming, his smile a great enamelled gash across his face. The music became louder, closer, earshattering now. "Welcome," the shouts rang out. "Welcome." "Welcome!" "English!" The word escaped Dave's lips, in a sudden hiss. "For God's sake, Cal, they're speaking English." "Something's wrong," Cal said tightly. "This isn't Mars. We've made a ihi stake, Dave." The fat man was closer now, still grinning, his stomach protruding, a gold watch hanging across his vest beneath his jacket. He wore a white carnation in his buttonhole. A homburg, blacky was perched solidly atop his head. "They're human' Dave whispered. The fat man stopped before them, raised his hands. The music ceased as abruptly as it had begun. He stepped forward and extended his hand. "Welcome home," he said. Welcome home! The words seared acrpss Cal's mind with sudden understanding. "There's some mistake . , he started. "Mistake?" The fat man chuckled. "Nonsense, nonsense. I am Mayor Panley. You're back in New Galleth, gentlemen. The city is yours. The world is yours ! Welcome home." "You don't understand," Cal persisted, "We've just come from Earth, We've just travelled more than # miles through space. We're from Earth." "I know," the mayor said, "I know." "You know?" "But of course. Isn't it wonderful?" The crowd cheered behind him, telling the night how wonderful it was. Cal blinked, turned to Dave. The mayor put his arms about the two men. "We've been watching your approach for weeks. I'll have to admit we were a little worried in the beginning." "Worried?" The mayor began chuckling again. "Why yes, yes. Not that we didn't think you'd makp it. But there were some who... ahh, here are the television trucks now." The trucks wheeled across the sand, just like the thousands of trucks Cal had seen back on Earth, The television cameras pointed down at them, and the men stood behind them with earphones on. "Smile. Smile," the mayor whispered. Cal smiled. Dave, smiled, too. "Ladies and gentlemen," Mayor Panley said to the cameras, "It is the distinct hpnor of New Calleth... The crowd raised their voices, drowning out his voice. The banners waved, yellow, red, blue, orange. Welcome, welcome, welcome. "... the distinct honor of New Calleth to be able to welcome home Bobby Galus and Gary Dale." "Galus! Dale!" the voices sang, "Galus! Dale!" "Galus!" "Dale!" "Just a second," Cal interrupted. "You don't understand at all. Those aren't our... "Four years in space," the mayor continued, "four years among the stars. To Earth and back, fellow citizens, for the glory of Mars." "You've got that twisted," Cal said. "We didn't..." The mayor took Cal's elbow and turned him toward the cameras. "You were in space for four years, weren't you Captain Galus?" "Yes, we were. But it wasn't... "Space!" the mayor gushed. "Limitless space. The first men to land on Earth." Again the cries of the crowd split the night. "Across the stretches of sky," the mayor continued. "Across the unchartered wilderness above, across the... T here were banquets and more banquets, and women of every size and shape. The city of New Calieth went all out to welcome the space travellers. Bobby Galus and Gary Dale. At the end of a week of festivity, the mayor came to Cal and Dave. "Have you enjoyed your stay, boys?" he asked, "It was swell," Cal said, "but youVe got things all... "I was wondering when you planned on leaving for the capitol. Don't misunderstand me. We'd like you to stay as long as you want to, but..." "For God's sake," Cal snapped,  "will you please listen to me?" Mayor Panley was visibly shaken. "Why, of course, Captain Galus. Of course. Why, certainly." He lapsed into silence. "I'm not Bobby Galus," Cal said. "And this isn't Gary Dale." The mayor nodded his head. "You're... not... Galus and Dale," he said slowly. "That's right," Cal said. "We didn't go to Earth. We came from there. This is the first time we've ever been on. Mars. Do you understand? We're Earthmen." "Earthmen?" The mayor considered this for a second and then burst out laughing. "Why, that's preposterous. Absolutely preposterous!" His laugh rose in volume to a bellow. "Oh, you're joking. I should have known. You're only joking." "We're not joking. This is all some kind of a horrible mistake. We're the first men to land on Mars. You've got to understand that," Dave pleaded. The mayor was still laughing. He walked to the door and opened it. "All right, boys, have your little joke. You've earned the right to it. I'll make arrangements for you to leave for Dome City in the morning." He shook his head and chuckled again. "Earthmen. Tchtch." And then he was gone. They sat alone in the hotel room. It looked like any Earth hotel they'd ever been in. A big soft bed. A wall telephone. Twn dressers. Two armchairs. A big mirror over one of the dressers. A television set on the other dresser. "This is screwy," Dave said. "Is it possible we're back on Earth? Is it possible the joke is on us? Maybe everyone is just ribbing us. Maybe we've been going around in circles for four years. Maybe... "No," Cal said. "We're on Mars all right. I don't know exactly how to explain it, but I've got an idea." "What's that?" Dave asked. Gal shrugged. "Probably all wrong, of course. But it has something to do with comparable development of cultures on different planets." "You mean Mars is in exactly the same state of development as Earth?" "Something like that. You know the theory. Give two different places the same materials to start with, and their cultures will run parallel to each other for the rest of their existence." "Sure," Dave said. "But these guys Galus and Dale. How the hell could we possibly be mistaken for them?" 'T don't know." Cal leaned back on the bed and stared at the ceiling. "Maybe we'll find out in Dome City." "Maybe' Dave repeated hollowly. greeted their ship in Dome City. There were more parades, banners, bands, banquets, reporters, cameras, confetti, women, speeches, presentations. And at feist, they stood before the President's desk, two bodyguards standing on either side of him. He was a thin man, slightly balding, with rimless glasses, "Gentlemen," he said, "I don't have to tell you how pleased I am." Gal took a deep breath. "We've been trying to tell Mayor Panley," he said, "that we are not Galus and Dale." The President smiled. "I know. He told me of your little joke." "It's not a joke." The President cocked an eyebrow. "No?" He looked at his bodyguards. "Has space affec... did you feel any ill effects in space?", he asked. Gal grimaced. "Oh great! Now he thinks we're psycho. Look, can't you get this through your heads? IVe are from Earth, We never heard of Galus and Dale. My name is Calvin Manners, and this is David Langley." "Very interesting," the President said. He tapped his finger on the back of his other hand and stared at the two Earthmen. He reached over toward the inteicom on his desk then and pressed a button. "Yes?" a woman's voice asked. "Miss Daniels, will you bring in the photos of Gapt. Galus and Lt. Dale, please?" "Yes, sir." The President turned to the two men again. "Those are your ranks, are they not?" "Yes, but we're in the United  States Army." "The whatr "The United States Army. The United States is a country on Earth." "Really? Now we're getting somewhere. What else does Earth have? What is it like? Are the inhabitants intelligent?" "Yes, we are. We're Earthmen, can't you understand that?" "I think you're carrying this joke a little too far, gentlemen. A joke of dollars on your trip. Really, this "is no time for banter." Gal opened his mouth, ready to protest, just as the outside door swung wide. An attractive blonde in a smart suit stepped into the room and walked to the President's desk. She kept her eyes glued to the two Earthmen, dropped two large photographs on the desk, and turned. She stared over her shoulder at Cal and Dave until she was gone. The President smiled knowingly. "The women are failing all over you two, I imagine." "We're both married," Cal said drily. "We don't care for all this... "Married?" The President was shocked. "I thought we'd distinctly chosen unmarried men for the job. Strange.' "WeVe got wives on Earth Dave said. "Ah-ha," the President said. "Then they are intelligent beings. Pity, pity."  A twinge of anticipation curled up Gal's spine. "Pity? Why a pity? Why do you say that?" "Well, you know. Surely you realized this was the only flight we could afford." "What?" "For the meantime, anyway. We may attempt another flight in fifty years, sixty perhaps maybe more. But you've already proved space travel, Capt. Galus. The achievement is ours. All we need now is money to..." "Damn it. I'm not Capt. Galus,'" Cal shouted. "And we've got to get back to Earth. I've got a kid, Mr. President. He's six years old and... Cal stopped abruptly. "Oh, this is all nonsenseWhy am I arguing with you? Can't you understand that we are Earthmen? What do we have to do to prove it?" The President sighed and turned over the photographs on the desk. They were glossy prints of two men in uniform. They were young men, in khaki, smiles on their faces. One man looked exactly like Calvin Manners. The other strongly resembled David Langley. "Here are your photographs," the President said. "This is you, captain, and you, lieutenant. They were taken before the trip. You're younger, of course." Gal stared at the photograph. It could have been he. The nose was a little sharper, perhaps, and the face thinner. But it could have been he. # could have been he! "It's a freak accident," he shouted. "A coincidence in two parallel cultures, a..." He saw the look on the President's face then. It was a cold look, and a suspicious one. Cal stopped speaking, sweat staining the armpits of his uniform shirt. The President grinned again. "That's better. I understand the strain of space, gentlemen, but we must be practical, mustn't we?" He paused. "Shall we talk about Earth now?" T he only sound was the swish of the jets against the grass as the big ship came down. Slowly, nose pointed skyward, a yellow tail streaming out behind the tubes, it settled to the ground like a cat nuzzling its haunches against a velvet pillow... In the distance, the lights of New York danced crazily, gleaming from a thousand spires that scratched the sky. The radios blared forth excitedly, and the police  cars screamed through the night as they rushed to City Hall to pick up the mayor. Inside the ship, Gary Dale peered through the viewport. "I feel kind of funny," he said. A tremor of excitement flooded through Bobby Galus' thin frame. "Earth," he whispered, "We made it." Personalities While his circulation climbed, the stf world wondered E arly in #, a letter addressed to the Discussions column of Amazing Stories was opened by Howard Browne, then managing editor of the Z-D pulp chain. The letter was signed by a resident of Pennsylvania named Richard S. Shaver. Browne read the letter, snorted with characteristic honesty, and tossed it into the wastebasket, Browne's exact remark relative to the letter is not recorded. Possibly it contained the word "crackpot". The gist of it was certainly: "That's the last anyone will ever see of But Browne was wrong. He reckoned without the subsequent activities of a much-debated genius named Raymond A. Palmer, then editor of Amazing, known throughout the stf field as rap, those being the initials Vith which he signed editorials. Palmer retrieved the letter, visualized its possibilities -- possibilities which would have entirely escaped nine editors out of ten -- and the so-called Shaver Mystery was born. The Shaver Mystery did many things. It attracted a great many people; it angered a great many other people; it became the most widely discussed of all science fiction facets, bringing howls of denunciation from not only the organized fan clubs, but also from some of the most widely circulated and highly respected magazines in the nation, several of which lashed out bitterly at this "highly danger. ous nonsense". And -- not to be overlooked -- the Shaver Mystery added aft extra # copies per month to the circulation of Amazing Stories, the bellwether of the Ziff-Davis pulp chain. A good many students of the unusual made exhaustive investigations into the phenomenon salvaged so astutely from Browne's wastebasket. But the vast majority of them erred in basic procedure. They sought answers to such questions as: What is the Shaver Mystery? Who is Richard S. Shaver? Their prime question should have been: Who is Raymond A. Palmer? Shaver himself is of minor interest in the investigation of the science fiction bombshell which bears his name. He was -- and still is -- a highly competent writer concerning whom, Palmer states : Shaver encouraged by the publication of the letter y sent the rest of his secret -- the story of the Titans, Atlantis, and the caves of today. # words of A .Warning To Future Man", to he printed as a letter without pay. He had no thought of being an author". So I rewrote, making it #, largely Palmer. I still have the original manuscript if anyone would like proof it was not submitted as a story. It wasnt. Only the secret. And with that. Shaver would have rested. But I wanted to show... writers aren't geniuses, or even special people, or even 'educated". Just so they know # words and have an imagination. Shaver had both. No one could disagree with this last except to suggest that rap far understates the extent of Shaver's vocabulary. Shaver wrote -- under his own name and many pen names -- the original drafts of all the stories hinging upon the mystery. But above and behind him loomed the figure of Raymond A. Palmer, eliminating almost completely, Shaver's importance as a subject for investigation relative to the works in question. highlighted by appalling misfortune, great adversity and high courage. He was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on August #st, #. At the age of seven he was run over by a truck and permanent-? ly crippled. This last is worthy of note because there is reason to believe it engendered within him a bitterness he never outgrew. It also may be responsible for at least a portion of has many friends, but to arrive at the point of really knowing him is a long and difficult process at which few have succeeded. His most discernible characteristic is beyond doubt a never-yielding determination. He is a prolific writer, and he speaks of his early struggles in that field: If I knew an editor was in the market for a story, he'd have to buy it from me. If he wanted a sixtythousand word novel. I'd have it there when the doors opened. If he wanted a five, or a ten, or a fifteenthousand worder. I'd be there with it before anybody else. As a result of this energy and the ability to produce, he sold an astounding amount of fiction. Three percentage of which he produced while functioning for eight years as a sheet metal worker; ten years as a bookkeeper ; four years as an estimator in the building trades. Palmer's noteworthy career really began when he was offered the editorship of Amazing Stories in #. Ziff from The Teck Publishing Company, and Palmer took over the editorial chair in Chicago. From some strange whim rather than of necessity, Palmer followed the Spartan pattern the first few months of his editorship, spending each day exactly #c for food. This amount was divided into a nickel for breakfast, eleven cents for lunch, and a nightly banquet upon which he squandered twenty-one cents. Later, as the circulation of his magazine climbed, Palmer allocated somewhat more of his funds to the inner man. After #, things got steadily better in the fiction field. Under Palmer's guidance, the Ziff-Davis string expanded. Western, detective,-and adventure books were added. These Palmer turned over to new editors, keeping for himself Amazing Stones and a partial hand on the helm of Fantastic Ad ventures, its companion book. So, when Shaver's letter figuratively jumped into Palmer's hands, he was ready for it. And he knew, that readers of science fiction were ready for it. After the first reader-reaction, Palmer went to Pennsylvania for a personal visit with Shaver, gave him the green light, and went back to Chicago to check circulation figures. They were indeed gratifying. Letters began pouring in, abusing Shavfer and praising him. information he claims to have received -- voices which spoke to him, first through a turret lathe upon which he worked in a war plant. Many correspondents claimed company with Shaver in hearing the voices. Other correspondents took the view that Shaver was plain nuts -- that his copy was dangerous and should be removed from the newsstands. The fan clubs cluttered the mails with wrathy epistles, boycotting Palrper's "mystery" and consigning it to damnation. Then the club members dashed to the stands for the next issue of Amazing to see if their letters had been published. Palmer smiled, published them, and published more Shaver. Circulation zoomed. about is hard to determine. An understanding revulsion was felt in some Quarters to the heavy sex-andsadism flavor of the copy. It had a distinct Kraft-Ebbing touch and could hardly be rated as cheerful reading. There appeared to be no great secret nor any unsolvable mystery. The so-called mystery appeared to be the premise-frame upon which Shaver hung reams of erotic copy. The voices to which Shaver's remarkable ear was attuned, told him of a race of superior beings who purportedly inhabited the earth untold ages ago. This race functioned with benefit of mechanical gadgetry far in advance of our present equipment of that type. This advanced race. Shaver tells us, held sway over an inferior race of beings who bore them no good will whatever and would have done them in had the opportunity presented itself. They were held in check however, Eventually, the superior race, entirely familiar with space-travel, set out for greener planets. The inferior race, termed "deros", was left behind with all the advanced equipment known in the storyseries as "mech". And, Shaver vows, the deros are still with us; living in caves under the earth, and doing their very best to make things miserable for those who live topside. There are no tricks to which the deros will not stoop. They cause men to fail in both business and social life. They arrange nervous breakdowns. They jammed up Editor Palmer's typewriter and stole pertinent copy off his desk. They man the flying saucers that have bewildered our population for some time... ShavePs source of information was bottomless; he put it into stories; Palmer printed the stories. Circulation continued its' happy ascent. Such a bomb as this one, however, was slated by the very nature of things for a final explosion of some sort. The explosion came abruptly -- when the public clamor for an execution reached the ears of pany. They publish a number of magazines other than those in their pulp chain. Also, at the time in qiiestion, they were publishing both hard-cover books and a series of smaller volumes retailing below a dollar. Mr. Ziff is a civic-minded individual who gave and still gives a great deal of his time to projects outside his firm. For these reasons, he probably gave little attention to the pulp group, knowing it to be in competent hands. So it is entirely probable that when he first heard mention of the Shaver Mystery, he knew far less about it than the average reader of science fiction ; stf being a field of letters in which Mr. Ziff had little time to pleasure himself. But he made a point of looking in on the works of Mr. Shaver and had but one comment : "Kill it." Palmer has an added explanation: I had decided to go into the publishing business on my own. Naturally I would have to quit when I brought out a book in competition with Z-D. So I thought ahead -- two years -- and asked myself if Howard Browne , could handle this hot potato...  couldnt saddle my successor with a bomb like that. So I tapered the Mystery o, then killed it myself. I worked it so Ziff would disapprove. Another example of Palmer's ability is the Jesse James affair. This was probably his greatest promotional attempt. Its failure was due to circumstances beyond his control. He states: I had befriended the wife of a former Chief of Detectives (#I ) of St. Louis and who knew Frank James and all the other 'boys personally In both cases the quotes are Palmer's. She came to me with a revelation that a Dalton, out west, had told her he ivas  J and would she act as a confidante for his story or confession. She brought photos. I compared ears, decided Dalton really was James. I paid her way and that of her husband, to Oklahoma to find out. Her husband identified the man positively... I went to the nearest radio commentator -- the story was off... Today half of America believes it really was Jesse and the other half laughs  Me? I know it was Jesse, T have the proof ,... Jesses dead now. Just a few' weeks ago. For the last time. There'll never be another claimant. I made sure af that... said in his statement. A great deal which indicates the laughing half of America has by far the best case. One interesting sidelight on the affair was that the couple who brought Palmer the great news also oflfered proof that Billy the Kid the Missouri raider, were alive and well. If the evidence of these people is to be taken, it must be assumed that no one really dies. Mathematically, the chance of Dalton being James, are exactly twenty to one; that including James himself and the nineteen pretenders who have come forward through the years. And Palmer is probably right in the assertion that the last James has been buried. There are very few men aged one hundred and ten with the strength to come forward. Two points, still unmentioned relative to the James affair, are important in that they indicate Palmer has never deviated an inch from his basic and admirable talent -- that of selling magazines. When the Dalton-James proposition came to light, Palmer secured a contract and began immediately planning a Jesse James Western Magazine. At the same time he set his eye on the Chicago Railroad Fair and thought what a publicity scoop it would be if the roads would recognize and honor Dalton-James by allotting him a day in their program. This, Palmer believed -- and rightly so -- would be the clincher. But Major Lennox Lohr, in charge of the affair, didn't care whether Dalton was James or not. He took a dim view of honoring a man whose name was synonymous with lawlessness. Immediately upon the heels of this decision. Palmer's interest in Dalton became strictly academic. So the Shaver Mystery and the affair Dalton-James, have two points in common. Neither can stand up under even preliminary examination. And both are amazingly good copy. Labeling both of them hoaxes may be construed as criticism of Palmer. It is not meant to be. This is a day of supersalesmanship. Hoaxes far more dangerous and sinister are arranged in advertising agencies every day. Claims made in blatant print relative to deodorants, cigarettes, trusses, and dozens of other products are far more preposterous than the assertion that a lot of little men called deros are giving us a bad time. This last becomes almost probable when lined up beside a statement that a bar of soap will make a woman beautiful in two weeks. So, in these times of drab and unconvincing falsehood, there is still something to be thankful for. A Palmer promotion has the touch of genius. It has zing, sparkle, and true showmanship. It can be spotted a mile away by the bright lights. The thing to do is sit back and enjoy it. -- pwf Are you ready for me, Asir? Strange gods were worshipped on Mars. But were they so clever? T hey'd lost their own world. It Takes a Thief By Waiter Miller, Jr. T he ancient gods, our Fathersy rode down from the heav ens in the Firebirds of the Sun. Coming into the world, they found  no air for the breath of their souls. How shall we breathe? they asked of the Sun. And Sun gave them of His fire and beneath the earth they kindled the Blaze of the Great Wind. Good air roared from the womb of Mars our Mother, the ice burned with a great thunder, and there was air for the breath of Man. A thief, he was about to die like a thief. He hung from the post by his ' wrists. The wan sunlight glistened faintly on his naked back as he waited, eyes tightly closed, lips moving slowly as he pressed his face against the rough wood and stood on tiptoe to relieve the growing ache in his shoulders. When his ankles ached, he hung by the nails that pierced his forearms just above the wrists. He was young, perhaps in his tenth Marsyear, and his crisp black hair was close-cropped in the fashion of the bachelor who had not et sired a pup, or not yet admitted that he had. Lithe and sleek, with the quick knotty muscles and slender rawhide limbs of a wild thing, halffed and hungry with a quick furious hunger that crouched in ambush. His face, though twisted with pain and fright, remained that of a cocky pup. When he opened his eyes he could see the low hills of Mars, sunwashed and gray-green with trees, trees brought down from the heavens by the Ancient Fathers. But he could also see the executioner in the foreground, sitting spraddlelegged and calm while he chewed a blade #G of grass and waited, A squat man with a thick face, he occasionally peered at the thief with empty blue eyes -- while he , casually played mumblety-peg with the bleedingblade. His stare was blank. "Ready for me yet, Asir?" he grumbled, not unpleasantly. The knifeman sat beyond spitting range, but Asir spat, and tried to wipe his chin on the post. "Your dirty mother!" he mumbled. The executioner chuckled and played mumblety-peg. After three hours of dangling from the spikes that pierced his arms, Asir was weakening, and the blood throbbed hard in his temples, with each jolt of his heart a separate pulse of pain. The red stickiness had stopped oozing down his arms; they knew how fo drive the spike just right. But the heartbeats labored in his head like a hammer beating at red-hot iron. How many heartbeats in a lifetime -- and how many left to him now? He whimpered and writhed, beginning to lose all hope. Mara had gone to see the Chief Commoner, to plead with him for the pilferers life -- but Mara was about as trustworthy as a wild hiiffen, and he had visions of them chuckling together in Tokra's villa over a glass of amber wine, while life drained slowly from a young .thief. Asir regretted nothing. His father had been a renegade before him, had squandered his last ritual formula to buy a wife, then impoverished, had taken her away to the hills. Asir was bom in the hills, but he came back to the village of his ancestors to work as a servant and steal the rituals of his masters. No thief could last for long. A ritual-thief caused havoc in the community. The owner of a holy phrase, not knowing that it had been stolen, tried to spend it -- and eventually counter-claims would come to light, and a general accounting had to be called. The thief was' always found out. Asir had stolen more than wealth, he had stolen the strength of their souls. For this they hung him by his wrists and waited for him to beg for the bleeding-blade. Woman thirsts for husband Man thirsts for wife Baby thirsts for breast-milk Thief thirsts for knife... A rhyme from his childhood, a childish chant, an eenie-meenieminey for determining who should drink first from a nectar-cactus. He groaned and tried to shift his weight more comfortably. Where was Mara? II the squat man asked. Asir hated him with narrowed eyes. The executioner was bound by law to wait until his victim requested his fate. But Asir remained ignorant of what the fate would be. The Council of Senior Kinsmen judged him in  secret, and passed sentence as to what the executioner would do with the knife. But Asir was not informed of their judgment. He knew only that when he asked for it, the executioner would advance with the bleeding-blade and exact the punishment -- nis life, or an amputation, depending on the judgment. He might lose only an eye or an ear or a finger. But on the other hand, he might lose his life, both arms, or his masculinity. There was no way to find out until he asked for the punishment; If he refused to ask, they would leave him hanging there. In theory, a thief could escape by hanging four days, after which the execu- tioner would pull out the nails. Sometimes a culprit managed it but when the nails were pulled, the thing that toppled was already a corpse. The sun was sinking in the west, and it blinded him. Asir knew about the sun -- knew things the stupid council failed to know. A thief, if successful, frequently be came endowed with wisdom, for he memorized more wealth than a score of honest men. Quotations from the ancient gods-Fermi, Einstein, Elgermann, Hanser and the rest -- most men owned scattered phrases, and scattered phrases remained meaningless. But a thief memorized all transactions that he overheard, and the countless phrases could be fitted together into meaningful ideas. He knew now that Mars, once dead, was dying again, its air leaking away once more into space. And Man would die with it, unless something were done, and done quickly. The Blaze of the Great Wind needed to be rekindled under the earth, but it would not be done. The tribes had fallen into ignorance, even as the holy books had warned : It is realized that the colonists will be unable to maintain a tech-nology without basic tools  and that a rebuilding will require severa! generations of intelligently directed effort. Given the knowledge the colonists may he able to festore a machine culture if the knowledge continues to be bolsteted by desire. But if the thirds fourth and Nth generations fail to further the gtadual retooling process, the knowledge will become worthless. The quotation was from the god Roggins, Progress of the Mars-Cul ture, and he had stolen bits of it from various sources. The books themselves were no longer in existence, remembered only in memorized ritual chants, the possession of which meant wealth. Asir Was sick. Pain and slow loss of blood made him weak, and his vision blurred. He failed to see her Coming until he heard her feet rustling in the dry grass. "Mara -- " She smirked and spat contemptuously at the foot of the post. The daughter of a Senior Kinsman, she was a tall, slender girl with an arrogant strut and mocking eyes. She stood for a moment with folded, arms, eyeing him with amusement. Then, slowly, one eye closed in a solemn wink. She turned her back on him and spoke to the executioner. "May I taunt the prisoner, Slnbil?" she asked. "It is forbidden to speak ,to the thief," growled the knifeman. "Is he ready to beg for justice, Slubil?" The knifeman grinned and looked at Asir. "Are you ready for me yet, thief?" Asir hissed an insult. The girl had betrayed him. "Evidently a coward," she said. "Perhaps he means to hang four days." "Let him then." "NoI think that I should like to see him beg." She gave Asir a long searching glance, then turned to walk away. The thief cursed her quietly and followed her with his eyes, A dozen steps away she stopped again, looked back over her shoulder, and repeated the slow wink. Then she marched on toward her father's house. The wink made his scalp crawl for a moment, but then... Suppose she hasn't betrayed me? Suppose she had wheedled the sentence out of Tokra, and knew what his punishment would be. I think that I should like to see him beg. But on the other hand, the fickle she-devil might be tricking him into asking for a sentence that she knew would be death or dismemberment -- just to amuse herself. He cursed inwardly and trembled as he peered at the bored executioner. He licked his lips and fought against dizzyness as he groped for words. Slubil heard him muttering and looked up. "Are you ready for me yet?" A sir dosed his eyes and gritted his teeth. "Give it to me!" he yelped suddenly, and braced himself against the post. Why not? The short time gained couldn't be classed as living. Have it done with. Eternity would be sweet in comparison to this ignomy. A knife could be a blessing... He heard the executioner chuckle and stand up. He heard the man's footsteps approaching slowly, and the singing hiss of the knife as Slubil swung it in quick arcs. The executioner moved about him slowly, teasing him with the whistle of steel fanning the air about him. He was expected to beg. Slubil occasionally laid the knife against his skin and took it away again. Then Asir heard the rustle of the executioner's cloak as his arm went back. Asir opened his eyes. The executioner grinned as he held the blade high -- aimed at Asir's head! The girl had tricked him. He groaned and closed his eyes again, muttering a half-forgotten prayer. The stroke fell -- and the blade chopped into the post above his head, Asir fainted. When he awoke he lay in a crumpled heap on the ground. The executioner rolled him over with his foot. "In view of your extreme youth, thief," the knifeman growled, "the council has ordered you perpetually banished. The sun is setting. Let dawn find you in the hills. If you return to the plains, you will be chained to a wild hiiffen and dragged to death," Panting weekly, Asir groped at his forehead, and found a fresh wound, raw and rubbed with rust to make a scar. Slubil had marked him as an outcast. But except for the nailholes through his forearms, he was still in one piece. His hands were numb, and he could scarcely move his fingers. Slubil had bound the spike-wounds, but the bandages were bloody and leaking. When the knifeman had gone, Asir climbed weakly to his feet. Several of the townspeople stood nearby, snickering at him. He ignored their catcalls and staggered toward the outskirts of the village ten rninuljes away. He had to speak to Mara, and to her father if the crusty oldster would listen. Mis thief s knowledge weighed upon him and brought desperate fear. Darkness had fallen by the time he came to Welkir's house. The people spat at him in the streets, and some of them flung handfuls of loose dirt after him as he passed. A light flickered feebly through Welkifs door. Asir rattled it and waited. Welkir came with a lamp. He set the lamp on the floor and stood with feet spread apart, arms folded, glaring haughtily at the thief. His face was stiff as weathered stone. He said nothing, but only stared Contemptuously. Asir bowed his head. 'T have come to plead with you Senior Kinsman.' Welkir snorted disgust. "Against the mercy we have shown you?" He looked up quickly, shaking his head. "No! For that I am grateful." "What then?" "As a thief, I acquired much wisdom. I know that the World is dying, and the air is boiling out of it into the sky. I wish to be heard by the council. We must study the words of the ancients and perform their magic, lest our children's children be born to strangle in a dead world " Welkir snorted again. He picked up the lamp. "He who listens to a thief's wisdom is cursed. He who acts upon it is doubly cursed and a party to the crime.' "The vaults," Asir insisted. "The 'key to the Blaze of the Winds is in the vaults. The god Roggins tells us in the words -- "Stop! I will not hear!" "Very well, but the blaze can be rekindled, and the air renewed. The vaults -- " He stammered and shook his head. "The council must heat me." "The council will hear nothing, and you shall be gone before dawn. And the vaults are guarded by the sleeper called Big Joe. To enter is to die. Now go away," slammed the door, Asir sagged in defeat. He sank down on the doorstep to rest a moment. The night was black, except for lampflickers from an occasional window. "Ssssst!" A sound from the shadows. He looked around quickly, searching for the source. "Ssssst! Asir!" It was the "girl Mara, Welkifs daughter. She had slipped out the back of the house ana was peering at him around the corner. He arose quietly and went to her. "What did Slubil do to you?" she whispered. Asir gasped and caught her shoulders angrily. "Don't yOu know? "No! Stop! You're hurting me. Tokra wouldn't tell me. I made love to him, but he wouldn't tell." He released her with an angry curse. "You had to take It sometime" she hissed. "I knew if you waited you would be too weak from hanging to even run away." He called her a foul name, "Ingrate I" she snapped. "And I bought you a hiiffen!" "You what?' "Tokra gave me a ritual phrase and I bought you a hiiffen with it. You can't walk to the hills, you know." Asir burned with dull rage. "You slept with Tokra!" he snapped, "You're jealous!" she tittered. "How can I be jealous! I hate the sight of you!" "Very well then, I'll keep the hiiffen." he growled. "I won't need it, since I'rti not going to the hills!" She gasped. "You've got to go, you fool! They'll kill you!" He turned away, feeling sick. She caught at his arm and tried to pull him back. 'Asir! Take the hiiffen and "I'll go," he growled. "But not to the hills. I'm going out to the vault." He stalked away, but she trotted along beside him, trying to tug him back. "Fool! The vaults are sacred! The priests guard the entrance, and the Sleeper guards the inner door. They'll kil you if you try it, and if you linger, the council will kill you tomorrow." "Let them!" he snarled. "I am no sniveling townsman! I am of the hills, and my father was a renegade. Your council had no right to judge me. Now I shall judge themj The words were spoken hotly, and he realized their folly. He expected a scornful rebuke from Mara, but she hung onto his arm and pleaded with him. He had dragged her a dozen doorways from the house of her father. Her voice had lost its arrogance and became pleading. "Please, Asir! Go away. Listen! I will even go with you -- if you want me. He laughed harshly. "Tokra's leavings." She slapped him hard across the mouth. "Tokra is an impotent old dodderer. He can scarcely move for arthritis. You're an idiot! I sat on his lap and kissed his bald pate for you." "Then why did he give you a ritual phrase?" he asked stiffly. "Because he likes me." "You lie." He stalked angrily on. "Very well! Go to the vaults. I'll tell my father, and they'll hunt you down before you get there." She released his arm and stopped. Asir hesitated. She meant it. He came back to her slowly, then slipped his swollen hands to her throat. She did not back away. "Why don't I just choke you and leave you lying here?" he hissed. Her face was only a shadow in darkness, but he could see her cool smirk. "Because you love me, Asir of Franic." He dropped his hands and grunt- ed a low curse. She' laughed low and took his arm, "Come on. We'll go get the hiiffen," she said. Why not? he thought. Take her hiiffen, and take her too. He could dump her a few miles from the village, then circle back to the vaults. She leaned against him as they moved back toward her father's house, then skirted it and stole back to the field behind the row of dwellings. Phobos hung low in the westj its tiny disk lending only a faint glow to the darkness. He heard the hiifFen's breathing as they approached a hulking shadow in the gloom. Its great wings Snaked out #owly as it sensed their approach, and it made a low piping sound. A native Martian species, it bore no resemblance to the beasts that the ancients had brought with them from the sky. Its back was Covered with a thin shell like a beetles, but its belly was porous and soft. It digested food by sitting on it, and absorbing it. The wings were bony -- parchment stretched across a fragile frame. It Was headless, and lacked a centralized brain the nervous functions being distributed. T he great creature made no protest as they climbed up the broad flat back and strapped themselves down with the belts that had been threaded through holes cut in the hiifTen's thin, tough shell. Its lungs slowly gathered a tremendous breath of air, causing the riders , to rise up as the huge air-sacs became distended. The girth of an inflated hiiffen was nearly four times as great as when deflated. When the air was gathered, the creature began to shrink again as its muscles tightened, compressing the breath until a faint leakage-hiss came from behind. It waited, wings taut. The girl tugged at a ring set through the flem of its flank. There was a blast of sound and a jeVk. Nature's experiment in jet propulsion soared ahead and turned into the wind Its first breath exhausted, it gathered another arid blew itself ahead again. The ride was jerky. Each tail ward belch was a rough lurch. They let the huffen choose its own heading as it gained altitude. Then Mara tugged at the wingstraps, and the creature wheeled to soar toward the dark hills in the distance. Asir sat behind her, a sardonic smirk on his face, as the wind whipped about them. He waited until they had flown beyond screaming distance of the village. Then he took her shoulders lightly in his hands. Mistaking it for affection, she leaned back against him easily and rested her dark head on his Moulder. He kissed her--"while his hand felt gingerly for the knife at her belt. His fingers were numb but he managed to clutch dt, and press the blade lightly against her throat. She gasped. With his other hand, he caught her hair. "Now guide the hiiffen down!' he ordered. "Quickly!" he barked. "What are you going to do?" "Leave you here and circle back to the vaults." "No! Not out here at night!" He hesitated. There were slinking prowlers on the Cimmerian plain, beasts who would regard the marooned daughter of Welkir a delicious bit of good fortune, a gustatory delight of a sort they seldom were able to enjoy. Even above the moap of the wind, he could hear an occasional howLcry from the fanged welcoming committee that waited for its dinner beneath them. 'Very well," he growled reluctantly. "Turn toward the vaults. But one scream and I#I slice you." He took the blade from her throat but kept the point touching her back. "Please, Asir, no!" she pleaded. "Let me go on to the hills. Why do you want to go to the vaults? Because of Tokra?" He gouged her with the point until she yelped. "Tokra be damned, and you with him!" he snarled. "Turn back," "I'm going down to kindle the Blaze of the Winds." "You're mad The spirits of the ancients live in the vaults." "I am going to kindle the Blaze of the Winds," he insisted stubbornly. "Now either turn back, or go down and I'll turn back alone." A fter a hesitant moment, she tugged at a wing-rein and the hiiffen banked majestically. They flew a mile to the south of the village, then beyond it toward the cloister where the pdests of Big Joe guarded the entrance to the vaults. The cloister was marked by a patch of faint light on the ground ahead. "Circle around it once," he ordered. "You can't get in. They'll kill you." He doubted it. No one ever tried to enter, except the priests who carried small animals down as sacrifices to the great Sleeper. Since no outsider ever dared go near the shaft, the gixards expected no one. He doubted that Aey would be alert. The cloister was a hollow square widi a small stone tower rising in the center of the courtyard. The tower contained the entrance to the shaft. In the dim light of Phobos, assisted by yellow flickers from the cloister windows, he peered at the courtyard as they circled closer. It seeiiied to be empty. "Land beside the tower #' he ordered. "Asir -- please -- " "Do it!" The hiiffen plunged rapidly, soared across the outer walls, and burst into the courtyard. It landed with a rough jolt and began squeaking plaintively. "Hurry!" hp hissed. "Get your straps off and let's go." "I'm not going." A prick of the knife, point changed her mind. They slid quickly to the ground, and Asir kicked the hiiffen in the flanks. The beast sucked in air and burst aloft. Startled faces were trying to peer through the lighted cloister windows into the courtyard. Someone cried a challenge. Asir darted to the door of the tower and dragged it open. Now forced to share the danger, the girl came with him without urging. They stepped into a stairlanding. A candle flickered from a wall bracket. A guard, sitting on the floor beneath the candle glanced up in complete surprise. Then he reached for a short barbed pike. Asir kicked him hard in the temple, then rolled his limp form outside. Men witji torches were running across the courtyard. He slammed the heavy metal door and bolted it. Fists began beating on the door. They paused for a moment to rest, and Mara stared at him in fright. He expected her to burst into angry speech, but she only leaned against the wall and panted. The dark mouth of the stairway yawned at them -- a stone throat that led into the bowels of Mars and the realm of the monster, Big Joe. He glanced at Mara thoughtfully, and felt sorry for her. 'T can leave you here," he offered, "but I'll have to tie you." She moistened her lips, glanced first at the stairs, then at the door where the guards were raising a frantic howl. She shook her head. 'T'll go with you." "The priests won't bother you, if they see that you were a prisoner.' I'll go with you." He was pleased, but angry with himself for the pleasure. An arrogant, spiteful, conniving wench, he told himself. She'd lied about Tokra. He grunted gruffly, seized the candle, and started down the stairs. When she started after him, he stiffened and glanced back, remembering the barbed pike. As he had suspected, she had f ucked it up. The point was a foot rom the small of his back. They stared at each other, and she wore her self-assured smirk. "Here," she said, and handed it casually. "You might need this.' T hey stared at each other again, but it was different this time. Bewildered, he shook his head and resumed the descent toward the vaults. The guards were battering at the door behind them. The stairwell was damp and cold. Blackness folded about them like a shroud. They moved in silence, and after five thousand steps, Asir stopped counting. Somewhere in the depths, Big Joe slept his restless sleep. Asir wondered grimly how long it would take the guards to tear down the metal door. Somehow they had to get past Big Joe before the guards came thundering after them. There was a way to get around the monster: of that he was certain. A series of twenty-four numbers was involved, and he had memorized them with a stolen bit of ritual. How to use them was a different matter. He imagined vaguely that one must call them out in a loud voice before the inner entrance. The girl walked beside him now, and he could feel her shivering. His eyes were quick and nervous as he scanned each pool of darkness, each nook and cranny along the stairway wall. The well was silent except for the mutter of their footsteps, and the gloom was full of musty odors. The candle afforded little light. "I told you the truth about Tokra," she blurted suddenly. Asir glowered straight ahead and said nothing, embarrassed by his previous jealousy. They moved on in silence. Suddenly she stopped. "Look," she hissed, pointing down ahead. He shielded the candle with his hand and peered downward toward a small square of dim light. "The bottom of the stairs," he muttered. The light seemed faiht and diffuse, with a slight greenish cast. Asir blew out the candle, and the girl quickly protested. "How will we see to climb again?" He laughed humorlessly. "What makes you think we will?" She moaned and clutched at his arm, but came with him as he descended slowly toward the light. The stairway opened into a long corridor whose ceiling was faintly luminous. White-faced and frightened, they paused on the bottom step and looked down the corridor. Mara gasped and covered her eyes. "Big Joe!" she whispered in awe,. He stared through the stairwell door and doyn the corridor through another door into a large room. Big Joe sat in the center of the room, sleeping his sleep of ages amid a heap of broken and whitening bones. A creature of metal, twice the height of Asir, he had obviously been designed to kill. Trifingered hands with gleaming talons, and a monstrous head shaped like a Marswolf, with long silver fangs. Why should a metalcreature have fangs, unless he had been built to kill? The behemoth slept in a crouch, waiting for the intruders. He tugged the girl through the stairwell door. A voice droned out of nowhere: "# you have come to plunder, go back! He stiffened, looking around. The girl whimpered. "Stay here by the stairs," he told her, and pushed her firmly back through the door. Asir started slowly toward the room where Big Joe waited. Beyond the room he could see another door, and the monster's job was appalrently to keep intruders back from the inner vaults where, according to the ritual chants, the Blaze of the Winds could be kindled. ' Halfway along the corridor, the voice called out again, beginning a kind of sing-song chant; "Big Joe will kill you. Big Joe will kill you. Big Joe will kill you -- He turned slowly, searching for the speaker. But the voice seemed to come from a black disk on the wall. The talking-machines perhaps, as mentioned somewhere in the ritual. A few paces from the entrance to the room, the voice fell silent. He stopped at the door, staring in at the monster. Then he took a deep breath and began chanting the twenty-four numbers in a loud but quavering voice. Big Joe remained in his motionless crouch. Nothing happened. He stepped through the doorway. B ig joe emitted a deafening roar, straightened with a metallic groan, and lumbered toward him, taloned hands extended and eyes blazing furiously. Asir shrieked and ran for his life. Then he saw Mara lying sprawled in the stairway entrance. She had fainted. Blocking an impulse to leap over her and flee alone, he stopped to lift her. But suddenly he realized that there was no pursuit. He looked back. Big Joe had returned to his former position, and he appeared to be asleep again. Puzzled, Asir stepped back into the corridor. "# you have come to plunder, go backy He moved gingerly ahead again. "Big Joe will kill you, Big Joe will kill you, Big Joe will kill -- He recovered the barbed Dike f from the floor and stole into the .#one of silence. This time he stopped to look around. Slowly he reached the pike-staff through the doorway. Nothing happened. He stepped closer and waved it around inside. Big Joe remained motionless. Then he dropped the point of the pike to the floor. The monster bellowed and started to rise. A sir leaped backy scalp crawling. But Big Joe settled back in his crouch. Fighting a desire to flee Asir reached the pike through the door and rapped it on the floor again. This time nothing happened. He glanced down. The pike's point rested in the center of a gray floors tile, just to the left of the entrance. The floor was a checkerboard pattern of gray and white. He tapped another gray square, and this time the monster started out of his drowse again. After a moment's thought, he began touching each tile within reach of the door. Most of them brought a response from Big Joe. He found four that did not. He knelt down before the door to peer at them closely. The first was unmarked. The second bore a dot in the center. The third bore two, and the fourth three -- in order of their distance from the door. He stood up and stepped inside again, standing on the fifst tile. Big Joe remained motionless. He stepped diagonally left to the sec ond -- straight ahead to the third- -- then diagonally right to the fourth. He stood there for a moment, trembling and staring at the Sleeper. He was four feet past the door! Having assured himself that the monster was still asleep, he crouched to peer at the next tiles. He stared for a long time, but found no similar markings. Were the dots coincidence? He reached out with the pike, then drew it back. He was too close to the Sleeper to risk a mistake. He stood up and looked around care fully, noting each detail of the room -- and of the floor in particular. He counted the rows and colximns of tiles- -- twenty-four each way. Twenty-four -- and there were twenty-four numbers in the series that was somehow connected with safe passage through the room. He frowned and muttered through the series to himself -- # , I , # , # , # , #  ## I . The first four numbers -- #, #. And the tiles -- the first with nO dots, the second with one, the third with two, the fourth with three. But the four tiles were' not in a straight line, and there Were no marked ones beyond the fourth. He backed out of the room and studied them from the end of the corridor again.  Mara had come dizriiy awake and was calling for him weakly. He replied reassuringly and turned to his task again. "First tile, then diagonally left, then straight, then diagonally right -- -" #, #, #, #. A hunch came. He advanced as far as the second tile, then reached as far ahead as he could and touched the square diagonally right from the fourth one. Big Joe re mained motionless but began to speak. His scalp bristled at the growling voice. "If the intruder makes an err or , Joe will Standing tense, ready to leap back to the corridor, he touched the square again The motionless behemoth repeated the grim waming Asir tried to reach the square diagonally right from the fifth, but could not without stepping up to , the third. Taking a deep breath, he stepped up and extended the pike cautiously, keeping his eyes on Big Joe. The pike rapped the floor. " the intruder makes an error, Big Joe will kill.' But the. huge figure remained in his place. square, the path went left, straight, right; right, right. And after zero, the numbers went #, #, #, #, #. Apparently he had found the key. One meant a square to the southeast; two meant south; and three southwest. Shivering, he moved up to the fifth square upon which the monster growled his first warning. He looked back at the. door, then at Big Joe. The taloned. hands could grab him before he could dive back into the corridor. He hesitated. He could either turn back now, or gamble his life on the accuracy of the tentative belief. The girl was calling to him again.  , "Come to the end of the corri dor!' he replied. She came hurriedly, to his surprise. he bellowed. "Stay back of the entrance! Not on the tile! Nor Slowly she withdrew the foot that hung poised over a triggertile. "You can't come in unless you know how," he gasped. She blinked at him and glanced nervously back over her shoulder. "But I hear them. They're coming down the stairs." Asir cursed softly. Now he had to go ahead. "Wait just a minute," he said. "Then ril show you how to come through." He advanced to the last tile that he had tested and stopped. The next two numbers were two -- for straight ahead. And they would take him within easy reach of, the long taloned arms of the murderous sentinel. He glanced around in fright at the crushed bones scattered across the floor. Some were human. Others were animal-sacrifices tossed in by the priests. He had tested only one two -- back near the door. If he made a mistake, he would never escape; no need bothering with the pike. He stepped to the next tile and closed his eyes. " the intrurder makes an error, Big Joe will kilir He opened his eyes again and heaved a breath of relief. "Asir! They're getting closer! I can hear them!" He listened for a moment, A faint murmur of angry voices in the distance. "All right," he said calmly. "Step only on the tiles I tell you. See the gray one at the left of the door?" She pointed. "This one?" "Yes, step on it." The girl moved up and stared fearfully at 'the monstrous sentinel. He guided her up toward him. "Diagonally left -- one ahead -- diagonally right. Now don't be frightened when he speaks -- " The girl came on until she stood one square behind him. Her quick frightened breathing blended with the growing sounds of shouting from the stairway. He glanced up at Big Joe, noticing for the first time that the steel jaws were stained with a red-brown crust. He shuddered. The grim chess-game continued a cautious step at a time, with the girl following one square behind him. What if she fainted again? And fell across a triggered tile? They passed within a foot of Big Joe's arm. Looking up, he saw the monster's eyes move -- following them, scrutinizing them as they passed. He froze. "We want no plunder," he said to the machine. The gaze was steady and unwinking. "The air is leaking away from the world." The monster remained silent. "Hurry!"' whimpered the girl. Their pursuers were gaining rapidly and they had crossed only half the distance to the opposing doorway. Progress was slower now, for Asir needed occasionally to repeat through the whole series of numbers, looking back to count squares and make certain that the next step was not a fatal one. "They won't dare to come in after us," he said hopefully. "And if they do?" " the intruder makes an error. Big Joe will killj announced the machine as Asir took another step. "Eight squares to go!" he muttered, and stopped to count again. "Asir! They're in the corridor!" Hearing the rumble of voices, he looked back to see blue-robed men the room. But halfway down the hall, the priests paused -- seeing the unbelievable; two intruders walking safely past their devil-god. They growled excitedly among themselves. Asir took another step. Again the machine voiced the monotonous warning. the intruder makes an error..." H earing their deity speak, the priests of Big Joe babbled wildly and withdrew a little. But one, more impulsive than the rest, began shrieking. the intruders! Cut them down with your spears!' Asir glanced back to see two of themracing toward the room, lances cocked for the throw. If a spear struck a trigger-tile -- "Stop!" he bellowed, facing around. The two priests paused. Wondering if it would result in his sudden death, he rested a hand lightly against the huge steel arm of the robot, then leaned against it. The huge eyes were staring down at him, but Big Joe did not move. The spearmen stood frozen, gaping at the thief's familiarity with the horrendous hulk. Then, slowly they backed away. Continuing his bluff, he looked up at Big Joe and spoke in a loud voice. "If they throw their spears or try to enter, kill them He turned his back on the throng in the hall and continued the cautious advance. Five to go, four three, two --  He paused to stare into the room beyond. Gleaming machinery -- all silent -- "and great panels, covered with a multitude of white circles and dials. His heart sank. If here lay the magic that controlled the Blaze of the Great Wind, he could never hope to re-kindle it. He stepped through the doorway, and the girl followed. Immediately the robot spoke like low thunder. 'The identity of the two technologists is recognized. Hereafter they may pass with impunity. Big Joe is charged to ask the following: why do the technologists come whert it is not yet time? Staring back, Asir saw that the robot's head had turned so that he was looking directly back at the thief and the girl. Asir also saw that someone had approached the door again. Not priests, but townspeople. He stared, recognizing the Chief Commoner, and the girl's father Welkir, three other Senior JCinsmen, and -- Slubil, the executioner who had nailed hhn to the post "Father! Stay back." Welkir remained silent, glaring at them. He turned and whispered to the Chief Commoner. The Chief Commoner whispered to Slubil. The executioner nodded grimly and took a short-axe from his belt thong. He stepped through the entrance, his left foot striking the zero-tile. He peered at Big Joe and saw that the monster remained motionless. He grinned at the ones behind him, then snarled in Asir's direction. "You're sentence has been changed, thief." "Don't try to cross, Slubil!" Asir barked, Slubil spat, brandished the axe, and stalked forward. Big Joe came up like a resurrection of fury, and his bellow was explosive in the vaults. Slubil froze, then stupidly drew back his axe. Asir gasped as the talons closed. He turned away quickly. Slubil's scream was cut off abruptly by a ripping sound, then a series of dull cracks and snaps. The girl shrieked and closed her eyes. There were two distinct thuds as Big Joe tossed Slubil aside. The priests and the townspeople -- all except Welkir -- had fled from the corridor and up the stairway. Welkir was on his kneqs, his hands covering his face' "Mara!" he moaned. "My daughter." "Go back, Father," she called. Dazed, the old man picked himself up weakly and staggered down the corridor toward the stairway. When he passed the place of the first warning voice, the robot moved again -- arose slowly and turned toward Asir and Mara who backed quickly away, deeper into the room of strange machines. Big Joe carrfe lumbering slowly after them. Asir looked around for a place to flee, but the monster stopped in the doorway. He spoke again, a mechanical drone like memorized ritual. Big Joe is charged with announcing his function for the intelligence of the technologists. His primary function is to prevent the entrance of possibly destructive organisms into the vaults containing the control equipment for the fusion reaction which must periodically renew atmospheric oxygen. His secondary function is to direct the technologists to records containing such information as they may need. His tertiary function is to carry out simple directions given by the technologists if such directions are possible to his limited design. Asir stared at the lumbering creature and realized for the first time that it was not alive, but only a machine built by the ancients to perform specific tasks. Despite the fresh redness about his hands and jaws. Big Joe was no more guilty of SlubiPs death than a grinding mill would be if the squat sadist had climbed into it while the Marsoxen were yoked to the crushing roller. Perhaps the ancients had been unnecessarily brutal in building such a guard -- but at least they had built him to look like a destroyer, and to give ample warning to the intruder. Glancing around at the machinery, he vaguely understood the reason for Big Joe. Such metals as these would mean riclies for swordmakers and smiths and plunderers of all kinds. A sir straightened his shoulders and addressed the machine. "Teach us how to kindle the Blaze of the Great Wind." caching is not within the designed functions of Big foe. I am charged to say: the renewal reaction should not be begun before the Marsyear #J)#, as th builders reckoned time. Asir frowned. The years were no longer numbered, but only named in honor of the Chief Commoners who ruled the villages. "How long until the year #?" he asked. Big Joe clucked like an adding machine. "Twelve Marsyears, technologist." Asir stared at the complicated machinery. Could they learn to operate it in twelve years? It seemed impossible. "How can we begin to learn?" he asked the robot. This is an instruction room, where you may examine records. The control mechanisms are installed in the deepest vault. Asir froyned and walked to the far end of the hall where another door opened into -- another anteroom. with another Big Joe! As he approached the second robot spoke:  " the intruder has not acquired the proper knowledge. Big Oswald will kilU' Thunderstruck, he leaped back from the entrance and swayed heavily against an instrument panel. The panel lit up and a polite recorded voice began reading something about "President Snell's role in the Eighth World War". He lurched away from the panel and stumbled back toward Mara who sat glumly on the foundation slap of a weighty machine. "What are you laughing about?" she muttered. "We're still in the first grade!" he groaned, envisioning a sequence of rooms. "We'll have to learn the magic of the tocients befcire we pass to the next' "The ancients weren't so great," she grumbled. "Look at the mural on the wall." Asir looked, and saw only a strange design of circles about a bright splash of yellow that might have been the sun "What about it?" he asked. "My father taught me about the planets," ' she said. "That is supposed to be the way they go around the sun." "What's wrong with It?" "One planet too many," she said. "Everyone knows that there is only an asteroid belt between Mars and Venus. The picture shows a planet there." Asir shrugged indifferently, being interested only in the machinery"Can't you allow them one small mistake?" "I suppose." She paused, gazing miserably in the direction in which her father had gone. "What do we do now?" Asir considered it for a long tinie. Then he spoke to Big Joe. "You Will come with us to the village' The machine was silent for a md ment, then: "There is an apparent contradiction between primary and tertiary functions. Request priority decision by technologist Asir failed to understand. He re peated his request.' The robot turned slowly and stepped through the doorway. He waited. Asir grinned. "Let's go back up," he said to the girl. She arose eagerly. They crossed the anteroom to the corridor and began the long climb toward the surface, with Big Joe lumbering along behind. "What about your banishment, Asir?" she asked gravely. "Wait and see' He envisioned the pandemonium that would reign when girl, man, and robot marched through the village to the council house, and he chuckled. "I think that I shall be the next Chief Commoner," he Said. "And my councilmen will all be thieves." "Thieves!" she gasped, "Why?" "Thieves who are not afraid to steal the knowledge of the gods tad beCorne technologists, to kindle the Bla#e of the Winds." "What is a 'technologist', Asir?" she asked worshipfully. Asir glowered at himself for bluridering with words he did not understand, but could not admit ignorance to Mara who clung tightly to his arm. "I think," he said, "that a technologist is a thief who tells the gods what to do." "Kiss me, Technologist," she told him in a small voice Big Joe clanked to a stop to wait for them to move on. He waited a long time. Here was a test for the bravest of explorers. A monster that prowled a grim planet and hid behind phantoms. , By John W. Jakes  T he forward cabin of the little ship was unbearably hot. Corrigan and Wingfield sat stripped to the waist, their fingers working numbly on the keys of the data recorders in each wall. Beyond the curving glass of the cabin window lay the arid noonday wilderness of the tiny world, a rocky jumbled wasteland sweltering under an immense yellow sun. Corrigan sighed loudly and pushed back his sandy hair. "Joe, I quit. Its just too" damned hot." Wingfield, a squat dark-haired man with large black eyes and a weak, shapeless mouth, turned around and stared at him. "Cut it outj'Vince," he said in a wheedling tone. "WeVe only got two more days to chart this place and move on. After all, there are six more hunks of stuff around this sun, and weVe got to do them all this trip." Wearily, Corrigan nodded and turned back to the keys. They were filmed with a faint coating of sweat. If all the other six are like this, Corrigan thought grimly, we'll go nuts. Nothing but heat and yellow desert. No life of any kind, or at least none we've seen. Well, it would be better to get it over. He set his fingers down on the keys and began to type, wrinkling his nose at the fetid sweaty smell of the cabin. He wondered idly how long it would be before the walls melted. A few minutes later .Wingfield spoke to him. "Hey, Vince." Corrigan turned around again, grateful for the relief. "What is it?" 'T just thought of something. Morse isn't back yet." iDorrigan frowned. "He can take care of himself. Where' d he go?" "Out to check some of the rock formations up the hill." Corrigan gestured aimlessly. "Don't worry," Morse was a big f:?'tXf C#?# Sztrpfjt man, Keavy-bodied and efficient. Of them all, Corrigan thought -- K)f the three of them in Galactic Mapping Ship Number EighteenMorse was the most capable. "That was an hour and a half ago," Wingfield said scowling. "He should be back. I -- I didn't think about it. I got so busy working that I didn't remember about him." "It's too hot for thinking," Corrigan said sourly "Your brains fry." He got up from the recorder. "Come on, let's go have a look. Only don't bitch about not getting any work done." Deep down, Corrigan was glad for a chance to go outside, even if the heat was worse. The routine monotony of the job was beginning to wear on all of them. Wingfield reached into a wall locker and extracted one of the bigbarreled magnesium fire rifles. "I think I'll take this along," he said as they headed for the port. "Just in case." "There isn't anything to shoot," Corrigan said, pulling the port open. "Not a living thing. Just rocks and desert and that sun." He dropped to the ground and immediately felt the blood begin to heat within his body. Fifty yards below the place where the ship lay settled on the side of the hill, the bluff dropped away steeply. And far down lay the desolate yellow wasteland of a valley. That valley as yet remained unexplored. T hey went around the ship, Corrigan in front, and started up the hillside. They picked their way among the large porous boulders, each of them the same yellowish hue of the sun. They had gone about five hundred yards when Corrigan stopped, sniffing. His stomach turned over inside of him. "Wingfield," he said. "Smell that?" Wingfield turned his head from side to side. "Sweet , . he said softly. "I've smelled that stuff before, or something like it. What is it?" Corrigan leaned up against a boulder and looked straight at his companion. "You'll think I'm crazy, but it smells like some kind of dope. Martian hashish, maybe. I've smelled it in plenty of dives back in the System." Wingfield nodded. "It's not exactly the same, though. There's something -- well -- " He fumbled for a word and then laughed sheepishly. " -- different." Corrigan thought silently for a minute. He gazed up at the yellow ball of the sun and said, "That means something grows in this place. Something's alive," to make that smell." , "I don't know," Wingfield said dubiously. "It might be anything. You can't make inferences about life outside our System on the basis  of our own reference points. Things can just be too different." "We never smelled it before!" Corrigan said testily. "I think we'd better look for Morse." He started up the hill. They reached the top of the hill and looked around. Corrigan went in one direction, Wingfield the opposite way. They searched through the fallen jumble of yellow rocks fbr ten minutes. Then Corrigan heard Wingfield calling him. "Hey Vince. Gome here Quick #" He went at a trot. He could #ee Wingfield's head above one of the boulders. Wingfield was staring at the ground, his eyes wide with sick horror. Corriganjumped a pile of small boulders and came up to him. "What's wrong, Joe, what -- ' Corrigan looked down. It was Morse, lying on his back eyes wide open as he stared unblinkingly into the heart of the yellow sun. He'd been cutj slashed mutilated to a point beyond all comprehension. "His lips are moving,' Corrigan whispered. "Look at them." "Maybe he's trying tO tell tife something." Corrigan knelt down, trying t# keep from feeling sick. He put his ear Close to Morse's mouth and listened. A minute later he got up and faced Wingfield. "He keeps mumbling. I caught a couple of things. He said Mg and black dfhimdl and I saw my wife "The heat," Wingfield muttered thinly. "The heat got him. He fell." "Don't be stupid," Corrigan snarled. "Something tore his belly open. Something Morse was scrabbling in the yeb low dust, trying to raise himself on his elbows. He screamed in a final burst of strength. "I saw my wife! I saw her!" And then he fell back, A fine powdery cloud of yellow dust rose about his body. He would not speak nor move again. "Something alive killed him," Corrigan said again. The narcotic smell of the air made him sick. He tried to think clearly Wingfield stood by, staring at the Corpse Who had been their friend, holding tightly to the stock of the magnesium rifle. "I guess we'd better go back to the ship and find something to bury him with," Corrigan said, thinking aloud. He hesitated. "No -- we could put him in the refrigerator locker and take him back to the System for burial. I think -- Suddenly, Wingfield yClled out -- incoherently. where his companion pointed. His eyes swept up the curve of the large boUlder directly above them. His body went cold, even in the heat of the yellow sun. Wingfield made little whimpering noises. The beast crouched on top of the boulder, Watching them with huge bonfire eyes. It was over twelve feCt long, built like some fantastic dark panther, with burnished ebony flanks that shone in the sunlight. A long barbed tail switched in the air behind it. Its clawfe caressed the surface Of the boulder, making tiny scratching sounds, and its jaws hung open. Corrigan and Wingfield stood frozen, watching the alien thing in horror. Corrigan could see the blood on its Claws, smell the overpowering narcotic odor rising from its skin. Slowly the muscles in its hide began to ripple. Corrigan knew it was going to spring. Wingfield was somewhere behind him with the rifle. Corrigan whispered loudly, "Shoot, Joe." He heard Wingfield giggle, "It's Tommy. Hello, Tommy. And Jane. What are you two doing here?' The beast was rising now, gathering strength to come slashing dpwn on them in its black sleek fury. Corrigan whirled around. The magnesium rifle lay where it had fallen and Wingfield was giggling and pointing his finger at the side of the boulder. "Hello Tommy boy, how are you?' "Joe!" Corrigan grated. "Pick up -- He stopped. Behind him he heard the beast snarl. There was no time for Wingfield now. Corrigan leaped forward, shoving him out of the way. One hand scooped up the rifle even as he was turning. The beast leaped from the boulder as Corrigan raised the rifle. The black body was above him when he slapped the trigger bar. A ball of white fire whined upward and smashed into the black stomach. The beast squalled as Corrigan dived from its path. Then it was gone. Corrigan's shot had saved his own life but it hadn't bagged the game. Shaken, he turned to Wingfield who wis nodding his head vacantly. "Why didn't you use the rifle?" Corrigan said angrily. "I couldn't. My little boy Tommy was standing right there with Jane -- plain as day." He pointed at the boulder. "You're crazy," Corrigan said. He felt weak and terrified from the experience. He wondered if he had killed the beast or merely wounded it. "We'd better get back to the ship," he said. Wingfield nodded emptily. "I'm sure it was they," he said. Corrigan had his own ideas. As he trudged along, he thought of the tiny blue Martian tkriss cats who possessed the power of seeking into a human mind, lighting upon a thought-image and conjuring it up by some hypnotic process before the watcher's eyes. The beast was evidently a much higher variation of the phenomenon. f  Corrigan noticed large sticky stains on the sand at mgular intervals. He knelt down and sniffed. The narcotic stench filled his nostrils. He got up and said to Wingfield, "I shot the thing in the stomach. It must still be alive." "Xiisten, Vince," Wingfield protested, "I saw Tommy and Jane. I swear to God I did. Please believe me! And what was it that Morse said? He saw his wife?" "I believe you," Corrigan said. His mind raced ahead. The wound trail led down the hill past the ship and over the edge of the bluff. Leaving Wingfield outside, Corrigan hurried into the ship and returned with field glasses. The two men went to the edge of the bluff and Corrigan raised the glasses to his eyes, staring down to the yellow sunburnt valley. ThereT he exclaimed. The beast was moving slowly over the floor of the valley, its black coat simmering in the sun, the trail of narcotic life fluid leaking from the wound along the ground. He turned to Wingfield. "We've got to go after it. Right now." "W -- what?" "You heard rtle." "Vince, we can't!" Wingfield's fate contorted in terror. "It'll kill us. There's no sense. Look what it did to Morse. His stomach -- oh -- ' He covered his face with his hands. "I'm going anyway," Corrigan said. "It's wounded. It can be killed. And it may come back." Wingfield clutched his arm. "You wouldn't leave me alone, would you?" "I'm going after it," Corrigan said stubbornly, remembering the way Morse had laughed with them the night before. "You can do as you like." Slowly Wingfield's shoulders formed a defeated curve. "I'll go with you," he muttered. "What other choice have I got?" Corrigan said nothing. The two men stood on the lip of the cliff for a few more minutes, gazing out at the yellow alien desert below where the black dot that was the beast moved slowly, painfully toward the bluffs ringing the desert on the opposite side. Corrigan wondered absently what image the beast would pick from his mind. Probably his wife, back in the System. He remembered her accurately. Slender, corn-colored hair, die slightly prominent nose, the always-smiling mouth. The beast was clever. It could keep its fiery yellow desert kingdom to itself, free from alien invaders in silver rockets. Create the image, confuse, and divert attention. The frightened victim feared for himself as well as for the terribly real image, suddenly created and dreadfully concrete. "Lord!" Corrigan muttered, "can any man stand against it?" He knew full well what Wingfield had gone through. And Morse, before he had died. "We'd better get started,' he said. "And we'd better take a couple of extra rifles along." They started back up the hill toward the ship. The round yellow sun burned down on their backs, making the sweat run. Corrigan thought of the beast and wondered how he would feel when they caught up with it, watching his wife being stalked. Could he remember the image was not real? He won dered -- about both himself and Wingfield. They picked up enough food supplies from the rocket to last them overnight. Wingfield strapped the pack onto his back. Corrigan took two fully loaded magnesium fire rifles in addition to the one Wingfield carried. They started down the steep side of the bluff, following the trail of the wound in the hot light of midafternoon. When they reached the valley floor and began to trudge through the sand in the path the beast had taken, Wingfield spoke for the first time. "Vince, why do we have to go after it?"  "The. thing killed Morse." "But couldn't we just get in the ship and jet off and do the rest of the mapping from the air? That way it couldn't come back to get us. We'd be safe." Corrigan shook his head doggedly. There was a basic bitterness in his eyes Wingfield had noticed be- fore, deep, as though long-rooted and growir over through the years. T'm going on. The thing killed Morse. He was my friend, Joe." "He was mine too," Wingfield whined, "but I want to stay alive. I want to -- " "Shut up," Corrigan said sharply. His feet sloughed through the sand. Wingfield said something under his breath. T hey walked for two more hours. The sun became unbearably hot and Corrigan felt as though his brain was frying slowly. His eyes hurt and the yellow landscape became shot through with deep flashes of crimson. Wingfield breathed loudly and kept falling behind. The muscles in Corrigan's legs ached, but he kept moving, holding one of the rifles in his right hand. The other was slung across his back. Wingfield dropped his canteen. "The hills aren't getting any nearer. My canteen's empty." Corrigan turned on him angrily. "You know I didn't bring mine. That water was for both of us." "I can't help it," Wingfield said angrily. "I was thirsty, Vince. I can't help it." They staggered on for a few more minutes, finally coming to the top of a sloping rise. They stood there panting heavily. Suddenly Wingfield cried, "Look, Vince, look!" The city lay on the desert a half a. mile away. It lay white and sparkling and cool in the sun, white terrace on white terrace, utterly alien and strange in the middle of the burning yellow sand...The buildings towered up and up, their white marble walls covered with cool green vines. Fountains played with flashes of crystal and blue on the terraces. The city stood entirely deserted. "Look at those fountains!" Wingfield shouted. "There's your water for you!" he began to run. Corrigan followed him, vaguely troubled. There was something about the city that he did not like, something that gave him a strange feeling of evil when he thought about it. But he did not stop running. The water was inviting and he could almost hear its musical splashing as they reached the first of the buildings. The trail of the J)east vanishec at the edge of the city. Corrigan hardly noticed it. The streets through which they walked were shadowed and cool. They moved slowly now, savoring the blue coolness of those shadows, shrinking from the occasional patches of sunlight cutting down between the terraces. The city was refreshing, a dream-like haven in its quietness. "It's wonderful!" Wingfield breathed. "So still and peaceful. I want to find one of those fountains." They rounded a corner into an open court. White marble terraces faced a large circular pool of deep blue water with an ornate fountain in its center. Wingfield staggered forward, dropping his pack on the ground, leaving the rifle with it and rushing forward. He fell on his stomach, his mouth close to the pool's edge. Corrigan, a few feet behind him, heard him cry out. T he beast rose frotn the ceri ter of the pool, cleaving thd water cleanly, not making a single ripple in the calm liquid surface Its eyes glared balefully and the black tail twitched. Wingfield stag gered back, grabbing up his rifle as the beast advanced slowly, making snuffling sounds. Suddenly Corrigan knew what was wrong. The city. The city was the Martian ruins at Red Sands, back in the System  He had visited the place as a boy. It was one of thousands of memories in his braiii and the beast had chosen it... fny Gody Corrigan thought, the selectivity and the power... "There's Tommy!' Wingfield touted. Corrigan jammed the rifle butt against his hip but he was powerless to slap the trigger bar. The beast stood at the edge of the pool now, snarling. "Get back!" Corrigan's words were a moan. "I can't shoot!" Wingfield screamed. "Tommy's right in front Of him!" "Not Tommy," Corrigan sobbed. "Anne! Anne!" Wingfield's body blocked his view of the beast. Corrigan ran a few steps to the right, shouting Warnings to his Companion. But Wingfield was making motions In the air as if he were struggling with an invisible human being. Corrigan raised the gun again. He girded his will -- strained against it -- trying to fire. He could not. The beast crouched now, slavering -- sure of its power. And around about them, the city began to crumble away. The fountains dried up; the vines and the plants with ered to nothing. Only the beast remained, crouching in the sun, its bonfire eyes shining. Corrigan wept. He was powerless to fire. His arms sagged. Now Anne stood before the beast, her hair the exact corn color that he remembered. She wore the dress she had been wearing on the last day he. had seen her, and she was smilr ing. The smile seemed suddenly insane. She stared at Corrigan and smiled. It's not my wife, Corrigan's mind screamed. It's not my wife standing there holding me powerless If I fire, my slug will not tear the life from her body! No! No! But he knew it would and he could not fire the gun. An image. He thought of each letter of the word separately, thought of them and made pictures of them, big as the tallest buildings of Earth. He thought of dle powers blinking on and off Image. Image. Image. But it did no good. No more good than it would have done Wingfield who was on his knees crooning to his loved ones. The beast grinned hideously, and Corrigan knew it was well aware of its complete power. It crouched there, playing with them and it seemed to say to Corrigan: You know shes false but it does you no good -- that knowledge. My power lies deeper. Your loyalty and love are your weaknesses flow. Its tail lashed and it seemed to be deciding which to kill first. It chose Corrigan, possibly from the instinct he was the stronger of the two, though it apparently made littie difference. It crept toward him, toying with him the while -- playing with him. And Corrigan grinned. He raised his gun and sent five flaming slugs from its muzzle to smash the slavering maw until the great beast-skull was a red stub spouting blood. He lowered the rifle, still grinning without mirth. "You're a stronger man than I am," Wingfield said. He looked as though he had passed through a long and wasting illness. "No. Weaker, if anything." 'You fired at it twice." "The first time it hadn't concentrated on me." "But the second time it did." "When it showed me Anne, I was helpless." "But -- " "It got cocky. It wouldn't let well enough alone," "I don't get it." Corrigan did not answer directly. He stared straight ahead through bleak eyes. "My father was the devil's own nephew. It was bad for me. Worse for my mother. She died very young." "Good God! You mean -- "I've often regretted passing up the chances I had to kill my father."  After a while they got back to the ship. They climbed in and sailed away with the body of Morse in the ice box. A chat with the editor... Continued from page # All of us here in Kingston are going to make IF better and better as the days go by. We understand full well that thirty-five cents is not easily come by in these times of ever rising costs. So every one of our issues must be the best that can be bought or We wouldn't feel very happy about taking your money. D id it ever occur to you how many different tastes are catered to by the corner newsstand? It was brought home to me rather forcibly by the fact that IP's companion mag is a book of strange and mysterious true stories titled Quinn and has caused me to be thrown into contact with several top name writers. Fine fellows, all, and no mean manipulators on the typewriter, but their field of operation and mine are so utterly alien to each other that we scarcely spoke the same language. The specialized fiction fields include love stories, detective stories, sport yarns, true confessions and true crime, to name but a few. A complete list would fill a directory. However, you and I both know what all those readers are missing. Aren't you glad you're a scienceBy James V. Taurasi Editor Fantasy Times members in the late #s, of' ganized fandom is still small Gotn pared with the readership of stf magazines, but # experts on science fiction are a great help to the editors and publishers who want to know what their # more or less readers want. And that is just what fandom is; a core of experts, who make a hobby of reading, collecting and commenting on sciencefiction. Do they render the stf editor any Worthwhile service? You bet they do. Besides telling the editors their wants and dislikes they mirror the likes and dislikes of the readership' They also keep a weather eye open for any author who might slip in a plagiarized story; An example of this is the case of an Australian science fiction magazine, where a few authors were copying American stf stories and selling them as their own. A science fiction fan armed fiction magazines showed the Australian editor what was going on and of course the authors were given the gate. In years past, right stf fans that obtained payment for stories fot the authors when the publisher of certain stf magazines was slow in doing so. Also this group, through their amateur publications, keep the editors and publishers informed of what goes on in the field. Many editors and publishers would never know their magazines were being reprinted legally #t Otherwise, outside the United States if it was not for the fan collector. F andom h not organized Under one unit, as many readers are led to believe, because the members of science fiction fandom, just canH agree. They -- like the general readership -- have different ideas df what a story diould be, and theii likes and dislikes differ a great deal. No one group of fandom will give the editor any idea of what to print, but fandom as a whole will give the editor a good idea of what the readers want. And unlike the regular readers, this group will not jUst stop reading the magazine if they are displeased. Fandom will howl plenty and make sure the editors know about it. A wise stf editor will keep himself informed on what fandom thinks of his magazine, and thus know what his readers think. And, let's not forget the advertising angle in connection with stf fandom. Free advertising is given to the professional magazines amounting to thousands of dollars by the activities of stf fandom. Each year, for example, the fans hold a world stf convention. Usually this brings about newspaper, radio, television and magazine reports. Who gains by these reports? The professional magazines of course. Sure, some editors will state that they were the ones who steered the reporters to the conventions to get those writeups. Right they are, but try and get those writeups without the convention! Also most editors are cooperative in aiding the conventions with donations of illustrations, manuscripts and covers. These donations are the main means of paying . off a convention. But the auction of these items gives that professional magazine more publicity than that money could ever obtain. A ctually the cooperation between fandom and the professionals has always been very high and gets stronger every year. Both the fans and the editors realize that neither can get along without the other. Fandom is only there because there are science fiction magazines and books. Without them, fandom would soon die out. This almost happened in Australia when a ban was put on all stf magazines coming ban, plus the birth of an Australian stf magazine, saved fandom there from an untimely death. The same thing would happen in the United States and England if all professional magazines should fold. While on the other hand if all stf fandom should quit, the profession magazines would in a short time lose all their sparkle and pep and become as any other pulp magazine. This zombie-like existence would cause many to lose much of their general readers and thus fold. L ike any other group, fandom has its own quota of crack-pots and drive not only the rest of fandom, but the professional editors to the nearest bar. But fandom has a way to clean its own house and these crackpots either change their tunes or drop out. Fandom also has a way to clean up the professional field when the editor gets out of line and forgets that he is supposed to edit a science fiction magazine. Certain editors have found out what it is to have a large group of fans on their necks. The pressure that fandom can bring about is enormous. With their # plus amateur magazines and thousands of letters, they can make and have made many an editor cry 'uncle" and wish he had never gotten off the straight and narrow path of science fiction. All in all, we have a unique situation found in no other field of literature. A situation that will lift our brand of literature to heights never even dreamed about in other fields. A situation where both the editors and readers gain. A situation that could never be applied to any other field. Fandom -- the watch-dog of science fiction. "You must kill Koski the leader said. "But ril be dead before I get there" Buckmaster replied. "Whafs that got to do with it?" the leader wanted to know. Infinity's Chiid By Charles V. DeVet T he sense of taste was always first to go. For a week Buckmaster had ignored the fact that everything he ate tasted like flavorless gruel. He tried to make himself believe that it was some minor disorder of his glandular system. But the eighth day his second sense -- that of feeling -- left him and he staggered to his telephone in blind panic. There was no doubt now but that he had the dread Plague. He was glad he had taken the precaution of isolating himself from his family. He knew there was no hope for him now. They sent the black wagon for him. In the hospital he found himself herded with several hundred others into a ward designed to hold less than a hundred. The beds were crowded together and he could have reached to either side of him and touched another ravaged victim of the Plague. Next to go would be his sense of sight. Hope was a dead thing within him. Even to think of hoping made him realize how futile it would be. He screamed when the walls of darkness began to close in around him. It was the middle of the afternoon and a shaft of sunlight fell across the grimy blankets on his bed. The sunlight paled, then darkened , and wasgone. He screamed again. And again. He heard them move him to the death ward then, but he could not even feel their hands upon him. Three days later his tongue refused to form words. He fought a nameless terror as he strove with all the power of his will to speak. If he could say only one word, he felt, the encroaching disease would have to retreat and he would be safe. But the one word would not come. Four horrible days later the sounds around him -- the screams and the muttering -- iDecame fainter, and he faced the beginning of the end. At last it was all over. He knew he was still alive because he thought. But that was all. He could not see, hear, speak, feel, or taste. Nothing was left except thought; stark, terrible, useless thought! Strangely the awful horror faded then and his mind experieticea a grateful release. At first he sus pected the outlgt of his emotions had somehow become atrophied as had his senses, and that he was peaceful only because his real feelings could not break through the lumbness. However, some subtle compulsion within him -- some power struggling in its birththroes -- was beginning to breed its own energy and he send that it was the strength of that compulsion that had subdued the terror. He was at peace now, as he had never been at peace before. For a time, he did not question -- was entirely content to lie there and savor the wonderful feeling. He had lost even the definition of fear. No terror now from the slow closing of the five doors; no regrets; no forebodings. Only a vast happiness as he seemingly viewed life, suffering, and death as a man standing on a cliff looking out over a grefit misty valley. But soon came bonder and analysis. He looked backward and thought: It was a worlds but not my world. These are memories but not my memories. I lived them arid knew themyet none of them belongs to me. Strangethis soulfiber with which I think -- the last function left to tne -- is not a soutftber I have ever knoWfi beforei And he knew. I have never existed before this moment. He could not prove it nor explain it there in the dark house of his thinking. But he knew it was true. He wondered if he had taken over the body and mind -- complete with all the mental trappings -- of some other being. Or whether he had been just now conceived, fullblown and with memories of a synthetic past perhaps implanted also in the minds of those with whom he was supposed to have come in contact. He did not know. He was only sure that, before this moment, he had not been. W TH the realization came the certainty that he would not die. The force he felt within him -- he was not certain whether it was a part of himself, or the evidence of an outside control -- was too powerful. The inner spontaneity gathered strength until it became a striving, persistent vital force, a will of imperious purpose. It moved him and he moved his tongue and spoke. "I will not die!" he shouted. Some time later he grew aware that his sense of hearing had returned. He heard a voice say, "He was in the last stages about an hour ago, before he spoke. I thought I'd better call you." "You did right," a second voice answered. "What's his name?" "Clifford Buckmaster." They're talking about me, he thought. Like a burst of glory, sight returned. He looked up and saw two men standing beside his bed. The olde man wore a plain black suit. The younger was dressed in the white uniform of a doctor. "He can see now," the older man said. His was a voice Buckmaster disliked. "It looks as if he's going to recover," the doctor said. "That's never happened before. Do you want me to leave him here with the dying ones?" "No. wheel him into your office. And leave us alone there. My name is James Wagner. You have, of course, heard of me. I am the Director of Security." Buckmaster still rested in his hospital bed. They had screwed up the back until he sat almost straight. In his mouth there was a slight tang and knew the sense of taste returned, When he was able to feel again he would be entirely well. Yes, he'd heard of Wagner before. He nodded. "And I know who you are," Wagner said. "You are one of the Underground that is trying to overthrow the General. That is correct, is it not?" Almost with surprise Buckmaster felt Wagner's words register in his mind. His implanted memories were still strange to him. But he recalled them quickly. Twenty years before, in #, the great Atomic War had ended. In the beginning the two giants faced each other across the separating oceans. No one was certain who sent the first bomb across in its controlled rocket; each side blamed the other. The methods of each were terrible in their efficiency. The great manufacturing cities were the first to go. After them went the vital transportation centers. Striving mightily for an early advantage each country forced landing armies on the enemy's shores. The armies invaded with their hundreds of thousands of men -- and the bombings continued. The colossus of the western hemisphere had set up autonomous launching stations so that if and when their major cities had all been bombed their ruling bodies decimated and scatteredeven if there were no longer any vestiges of a central authority -- the launchings would continue. The autonomous units had been a stroke of master plannings so ingenious that it was logical the giant of Eurasia had devised a similar plan B y the time the bombs had all been used, or their stations rendered incapable of functioning, the major cities were blackened, gutted, inoperative masses of destruction. Soon the invading armies no longer received orders, or supE lies of rations and arms. When this appened they knew governments they represented had ceased to exist. They were forced to live by the ingenuity of their commanders and their ability to forage. They could not evdn capitulate ; there was no one to whom they could surrender. i Those armies with weak commanders fell apart and one by one their men died at the hands of hostile natives, or hunger. The armies under  strong commanders, like General Andrei Koski, of the Eurasian command, carved themselves a place in their new environment. Koski had landed with a force of seventy thousand on the east coast of old Mexico. His army was different from the other invaders only in a secret weapon which they brought wiffr them The weapon's appearance was simple but it carried the potentiality of destruction for a world. Acting under previous orders from his government, Koski began moving northward, and was soon cutting a swath a hundred miles wide up the west bank of the Mississippi. By the time he reached the southern border of Minnesota he realized from what he saw on all sides, that for all practical purposes the war was over. His only choice now was to find a means of. survival for himself and his men. When Koski reached Duluth he circled the city. Almost miracu lously it had escaped the bombs. Its population was only a little over two hundred thousand, and Koski still retained nearly fifty thousand hardened fighting men. However, Duluth, KoSki found, wasgoverned by Earl Olson, an ex brigadier and a man equally as strong as himself. The city was fortified, and garrisoned by a force of well trained civilians who would fight to their death to defend their city and families. And they were well ledby Olson. Koski knew he could capture the city if he decided to, but the price Would be too dear. He moved on along the lakeshore and took over the city of Superior. Here he entrenched himself solidly and set up an efficient military government. By law every woman in the city still capable of bearing children was forced to take two husbands, at least one of which must be a Ruskie, as the invaders were called by the natives. In this way Koski insured a plentiful supply of children, most of whom would be loyal to him. A bonus of ten thousand dollars was offered to any woman from the outlying districts who would move to Superior and take two of its citizens in marriage. After the first hesitation, the girls and yoting women and widows flocked in from their barren farms and hamlets. By the end of twenty years the city had grown to near one hundred fifty thousand. Duluth in the meantime grew to three hundred thousand. Earl Olson ruled absolutely, but wisely and well. Between the two cities an alert truce held through the years and mutually advantageous trade flourished. Koski, in his city, held all authority in his own tight grip, administered by his former officers and backed by the undeviating loyalty of his soldiers. His rule was stern and when necessary, bloody. It might have been bloodier except for the threat of intervention by Olsohi T here are always men who fret under the hand of tyranny and the Underground had gradually risen until it grew into a powerful organization. Its demands were for a representative government chosen by vote of the people. This, of course, Koski refused. As a consequence the Underground formed an active resistance, with the retaliatory blood bath was prevented only by the threat of intervention by Olson, who had many friends in the Underground, especially his brother-in-law, Lestef Oliver. But right'd now liofie of this seemed very important to Buckmaster. Not important enough for hirtt to bother answering, "Answer when you're spoken to!" Wagner roared. For a moment Buckmaster deliberated riot replying. Just how unusual was the difference he had discovered in himself? Could he be hurt by someone like Wagner? He decided to wait until later to put it to the test. "What do you want me to say?" he asked. "I'm going to lay my cards on the table," Wagner said. "I want you to come over to our side." Still not very interested. Buckmaster asked, "Why should I?" ' "I think I can give you some very good reasons. In fact, unless you're a bigger fool than I think you are, I can convince you that it is the only wise thing to do. Because of your relatively smaller numbers, the Plague has caused havoc in your Underground." "Yes," Buckmaster answered. "But We will have a vaccine before long." He knew this was purely bluff. "Possibly." Wagner pulled his cheeks up but his eyes remained chilled and cold. He had the trick of smiling mirthlessly. "But even if I were to grant you that, we estimate that already nearly half of your organization is dead from the Plague. There will be more before you can do anything. The rest we can hunt down at our leisure. So you see, even if we let you live. you'd soon be a man without a party' "We could start all over again if we had to," The first signs of feeling came back with a twinge of pain at the tip of the little finger on his left hand. "I doubt it very much." "What would I be expected to do?" Buckmaster asked. "Simply this. Go back among your former comrades and act normal. But let me know what they're planning. In time we'd get them anyway, but with your help, the job will be easier -- cleaner, let us say." "In other words, you want me to act as the Judas ram?" "Call it what you like," Wagner's eyes narrowed. "Just remember that you've nothing to lose." "And after?" "You can name your own price. Within reason, of course." "And if I refuse?" wasn't necessary for him to answer. Buckmaster had seen the results of Wagner's sadism in the past. Whatever else might be mystifying to him he knew one thing: The instinct of self-preservation was still as strong as ever. He did not want to take the chance that the extraneous will he felt within him would be strong enough to combat what Wagner would try to do to him. "Let's say I agree," he said. "What comes next?" "Can you move your limbs yet?" Wagner asked. Buckmaster flexed his fingers and lifted his amis. "I believe I'm strong enough to walk," he said. "By the way," Wagner inquired, "have you any idea why you didn't die?" Buckmaster shook his head. "Well, no matter. Lie back and relax. Now look into my eyes. Concentrate on the right one." Buckmaster knew what was coming now. Mind contact! Subtly he felt the first tentative probe of Wagner's thought antenna. One part of his brain accepted it passively, but another part used the probe as a bridge. Wagner's thoughts seemed unguarded. Buckmaster easily read everything there. He had to hide his surprise at what he learned. Things that Wagner, by no process of logic would ever reveal to him. Reflections concerning the Plague. Remembrances of snatches of conversation with the General. Wagner's relations with women. Sex occupied many of his thoughts. The fear of Olson was there, in spite of Wagner's brave words earlier. Then Buckmaster read about himself in Wagner's mind and was certain something was wrong here. He saw that Wagner had no intention of ever letting him live, no matter how useful he might be. There was death for himself as soon as that usefulness was over. "Damn it," Wagner cursed, "relax. Let your mind open up to me. Are you deliberately trying to get yourself back in trouble by being stubborn?" Then he knew. The contact had been one-way. He had read Wagner's mind because Wagner had not realized he could do it, and had not thrown up a guard. Cautiously Buckmaster let fragments of careful thoughts escape. The moment he lowered the barriers of his mind he felt Wagner's power beat against him, wave upon wave. The sensation was frightening. Wagner seemed satisfied. Buckmaster could read very little in his mind now. "Done," Wagner said. "Now, one last warning. Don't try to double-cross me, or you'll regret the day you were born." Buckmaster's choices of action were very few. He doubted that he could make it but at least he should try to get to Duluth. At the toll bridge across the arm of the lake he bought a ticket. Nobody bothered him. He breathed easier as he rested against the iron railing waiting for the gate to open ; then stopped breathing as a tall man -- one of the Ruskies -- leaned over beside him and said, "It won't Work, friend."  Buckmaster tore up his ticket. Strangely, there was a sense of relief. The force -- the presence within him -- whatever it was, wanted him to return to his friends. It didn't compel him, it used no coercion. It merely presented good reasons for doing so. He could do more good there than by fleeing, it suggested. And, so strongly as almost to blot opt all other emotions, was the implanted desire -- an urgent, compelling command -- to stay and kill Koski. As Buckmaster started back, the thought struck him: Was he merely a pawn being moved by this inner power? Did he no longer have freedom of action? Was his will still his own? receive the summons from Koski. He fumed inwardly as he mounted the stairs to the General's second floor receiving room. It was always humiliating to be summoned like a common officer when he was in fact the ruler of the city. Koski had slipped bdly during the past few years but Wagner knew better than to put the old figurehead out of the way. He needed the power of that prestige until he had made his own position impregnable. Originally Wagner had been an unlettered lad from the steppes. When he had been made Koii's orderly, he had used his native cunning and slyness to ingratiate himself with the old commander. Soon Koski had made him his personal adjutant. From that advantageous position of trust it had been relatively simple for him to use his insidious talents to secure advantages for himself. During the process of organizing Superior's government Wagner had used his influence to get his own adherents appointed to key posts. By the time Koski began to succumb to the ravages of senility, Wagner held the most powerful position in the city -- that of Security Administratoti By now Koski was so far gone that he did not even realize he did not rule; that the city's functions had come under the control, direct and indirect, of Wagner. "You wanted to see me. Sir?" Wagner asked. "Yes," the General answered, the shaggy hairs of his eyebrows meeting in a frown. "Have the doctors found a remedy for the Plague yet? It has gone so far now that soon the manpower we must have for the Campaign will be threatened." "Not yet, Sir, but they are within sight of it." Wagner was always careful to keep the scorn he felt from his voice. The old dodderer was useful and must be pampered -- for awhile. The General still clung to his dream of the Campaign. His ultimate plan, from the time he had taken over Superior, had been to use the city as a base from which to spread his rule, until he had control of the entire continent -- in the name of the mother country, of course. He had never let himself see that it was but a dream. He was certain that he would find other pockets of his fellow-men who, like himself had set up autonomous governments. With their aid he stilk hoped for an ultimate victory over the enemy. This would always remain enemy territory to him. "If we don't stop the Plague before it spreads to our own men, I'U be forced to use the Weapon," Koski growled. His great bony features had lost all powder of expression except their habitual scowl, but his voice was still deep and vibrant. "I'll kill every man, woman, and child in the country!" Wagner had to admire the will to destruction that still rode the old man. He may have weakened in his mind but he had nver softened. And the Weapon? It was the one secret that Wagner had not been able to learn. "Yes, Sir," Wagner agreed. "If you should ever feel the need to use the Weapon, I ask you to remember that my only wish is to be of aid to my General." Koski's washed blue eyes grew crafty. "I fully realize that. But I will need no help. You may accept my compliments and withdraw." W agner muttered a soft oath under his breath as he bowed humbly. jtx, die," Buckmaster said. The two chairs in the small room were occupied by the men he faced. He sat on a steel-framed bed. "No," Lester Oliver was thoughtful. "I'm wondering why you didn't. Do you have any explanation?" "Only something that you wouldn't understand, unless it happened to you," Buckmaster answered. "I couldn't explain it." "Try." Oliver spoke softly, but Buckmaster knew that behind that softness Oliver hid a bulldog tenacity. Carefully, patiently Buckmaster told about the Force, trying to make them sense it as he had. "You feel then," Cecil Cuff, the other man in the room, said, "that you're in the grip of something over which you have no direct control?" "Yes?' "Are you certain that it is not the contact Wagner imposed on you?" "It came before Wagner was present," Buckmaster replied. Cuff turned to Oliver. "I know he believes what he is saying," he said. "But it's obvious that his mind has been tampered with. If we let him live, we'll be taking the risk that the General and Wagner are getting at us, through him." "That's right," Oliver answered. "I think he should be killed," Guff said. Oliver was thoughtful for a l#ng moment. "What do you think, Clifford?" he asked gently. He always called Buckmaster by his first name. Buckmaster breathed deeply. "Naturally I want to live," he answered. "But from the viewpoint of the Underground I suppose Cuff is right." "You say that you feel that this Force is a protective one," Oliver said. "Does it seem to you that perhaps we couldn't kill you -- that it would prevent us?" Buckmaster searched for words to express his thoughts. "I feel," he said, "that it won't let me be killed. It seems that I have a mission to fulfill, and that it won't let me die -- at least not until I accomplish what it desires. However, I feel also that it will, or can, do nothing concrete to prevent my being killed. It will probably aid me by convincing you that it would be better to let me live." "Do you feel that its purpose might be much the same as ours, and that it will attempt to convince us of that?" Oliver asked. "Something like that," Buckmaster answered. "At least the urge to kill Koski is so strong within me that I know I would not hesitate if I had the chance, even if it meant my own life' "Would you attempt to stop us if we tried to kill you?" "No." Oliver closed his eyes. He was silent for so long that it seemed he must be sleeping. But Buckmaster knew that Oliver's brain worked with lightning speed while his body reposed. Oliver was the most intelligent man he had ever known. He was head of the Underground solely because he was the fittest man for the job. F inally Oliver spoke. "We'll come back to it later," he said. "Did you learn anything that might help us, Clifford?" "I learned that the Plague is spread by contact -- only after the first symptoms show themselves. I read that in Wagner's mind before he realized that I was reading hl thoughts." "That will help. You say you made contact before you became en rapport with Wagner. Gan you control what you let him learn through you?" "I believe I ean, but I cant be certain." "If yOu could be certain, we wouldn't have to kill you," Oliver said. "You would be taking a chance," Buckmaster replied. "We can't afford to take any chances," Guff said. "He -- " "Yx)u're forgetting one thing, Cecil," Oliver interrupted. "As things stand right now, we're a lost cause. The Plague has killed many of our best men. The only thing that keeps Koski from staging a blood-bath is his fear of Governor Olson in Duluth. And pretty soon he won't have to fear that. We have only to lose another key dozen and Olson will have no friends here to aid." "May I offer a compromise?" Buckmaster asked. "As matters stand now, our only chance of winning freedom from Koski's savage rule is to kill him. And to do that we will have to kill Wagner first. Am I correct?" "Yes." Oliver raised his head. "What do you have to suggest?" "Let me try to kill Wagner. If I succeed our cause will have taken a big step. If he kills me first, then you've lost nothing more than if you'd killed me yourselves." After a barely perceptible hesitation Oliver nodded in agreement. For the rest of the day Buckmas-. ter improvised a simulated course of action to let seep through to Wagner whenever he felt a probe. He kept his mind blank otherwise and was quite certain that he carried on the deception well. He caught nothing from Wagner in return that was not deliberately let through. He suspected that his own control was as good. Though he had not had the practice at this that Wagner had. Toward evening he improvised a crisis. The Underground was plotting something big, he transmitted. He made the need for action imperative and asked for a personal interview. At first Wagner demurred. He wanted Buckmaster to stay on and give first hand reports. Buckmaster gave hints in return that he was suspected by the other members, and indicated that he must leave while still able to. Finally Wagner agreed. ' "You realize the risk you're taking, coming with me, Cecil?" Buckmaster asked. "I do," Cuff said with his unchangeable reserve. "But you'll need my help." Buckmaster wished he himself could remain as cool. His own nerves felt like wires that had been drawn too tightly. Cuff was tall and robust, with a pessimistic outlook on life... He seemed to sit back and watch life and its peoples as a spectator, willing to fight ruthlessly for what he believed was right, but never expecting to discover anything fine enough in his fellow men to hope for anything better from them. He had touched the borders of an existence that was mean and hard and dirty and he had long ago despaired of finding anything else. Yet there was nothing apathetic about his personality. Life's illusions were gone, but its fascination remained. too much," Buckmaster said. Cuff acknowledged the statement by nodding his head. "I believed that you might be under Wagner's power. Wagner is a brute trying to break us. On this trip you're going to make your own heaven or hell, and if you've got the courage to face it, I'll back you up." In the Administration Building the girl at the information desk told them, "The Director will see you in a moment." She led them into a waiting room. Three hard-faced men, all wearing black shirts, came in. They had the mark of killers about them. "Stand up." They checked fiuckmaster and Guff forweapons. None was found. All five toak the elevator to the sixth floor. Wagner was seated at his desk waiting for them when they walked into his office. He smiled his mirthless smile. "I see you brought com pany' he said. "We'll get two birds with one stone." Buckmaster knew then that there was little use trying any further deception. Wagner knew. If he were able to squeeze through just a short ten seconds the job could still be done. The three bodyguards stood a few yards behind them. "I have something here that will interest you' Buckmaster said. Slowly, Unhurriedly, but wasting no motion, he unbuttoned one flap on his shirt and reached a hand inside. He peeled back the long strip of adhesive tape covering the cavity below his ribs. He pulled out the small single-shot derringer con cealed there. Jle aimed from the waist and put the bullet into the middle of Wagner's smile. The smile cracked, and the crack became a shatter spreading in all directions. Buckmaster saw the trap then. He had shot at a reflection of Wagner. It had been a cleverly arranged mirror deception. Cuff turned to run through the door they had entered. But Buckmaster was so certain any attempt to escape would be in vain that he did not even move. Guff found the three guards blocking the doorway Buckmaster watched Wagner enter from opposite the cracked rnir ror. There were two more of his bodyguards with him. When the guards closed in Guff struggled until they spun him back against the wall where his head crashed with a dull crunch All the fight went out of him and he slumped in the arms of the men who held him. T wd of the guards held Buckmaster's arms. "A couple of fine birds,' Wagner said as he stood in front of them. Guff straightened with an effort of will and shook his head until his vision cleared He leveled his glancd at Wagner. "You're a mongrel cur," he said unemotionally;, "licking at the General's boots. He'll throw you another Scrap for this day's work." Both he and Buckmaster knew that he sealed his dWn fate with the words. The one thing Wagner could not tolerate Was ridicule, worse in the presence of his own men. Buckmaster caught the hard flat explosion in his face and pain in his eardrums as the gun that ap peared in Wagner's hand went off. As he watched Guff slump he knew the man was beyond torture. He suspected that this was what Guff had wanted. He had taken the easy way out. Buckmaster leaned his shoulders back and then with sudden violence pulled his arms free from the guards' grip. He slapped Wagner across the mouth with his left hand and brought his right fist around in a short arc that crushed the bone in Wagner's nose. He made no resistance as the guards grabbed him and twisted his arm cruelly behind his back. The hurt from Wagner's shattered nose brought a bright glisten of pain into his eyes. "That was a mistake' Wagner said, the depth of his anger making his voice soft and husky, "Fm going to make you whine like a dog." T he general was suffering the tragedy of a strong man whose mind was turning senile -- and who realized it. Only the two alternative objectives remained virile ; the Campaign and, that failing, the Weapon. The Weapon gave him his only solace in times of trouble. Now, going down into the basement of his house, he sought it out again. Letting himself through two thick concrete doors, which he opened with a key that he wore about his neck at all times, he entered the room that held his potentially terrible secret. The outer contour of the Weapon was a rectangular frame of rough lumber. Inside was a metal box, and in this reposed a semiglutinous mass of liquid. Nothing more. On the shelf above rested a bottle of aqua fortis. Quite simple substances -- apart. Together they could spell the destruction of a world. The Dictator himself, had given Koski his instructions long before, back in the homeland. "General," you are being sent with an army, but its purpose is to protect your Weapon, and to bring it into a position of maximum effectiveness, rather than to fight. You fully understand, I hope, that if you ever have to use it, your mission will certainly be fatal to yourself?" "I understand, Sire," Koski answered. 'T am thankful for the honor you have done me." "Your mission is to carry the Weapon to a central location on the North American continent. I believe you have the force necessary to accomplish that." Koski nodded but said nothing. "The component ingredients of the Weapon I know no better than you yourself. It was developed at the Institute. Its special faculty is its ability to free hydrogen from the moisture in the air, and to start a chain reaction. The physicists tell me that it will sear most of the continent once it starts reacting. About the only spot that would be spared are the dry regions, and maybe not even those. Just one thing you must remember -- do not use it unless you are certain that the war is definitely lost. Do you understand the importance of that command?" "I do," Koski answered. "But wouldn't it be better to use it as soon as possible? The lives of my men and myself would be a small price to pay for victory." "True, except for one big question," the Dictator replied. "The explosive is so deadly that it was impossible to experiment. There is no such thing as a little bit of it. Consequently we are not certain of its effects. We expect, and hope, that it will dissipate itself as it spreads too far from its initial explosion point, but we cannot be certain. It is possible that, once released, it will devastate the entire world. You see now why it must be used only as a last resort?" Many times since Koski had gone over that conversation in his mind. Had the war been lost? Neither side had come through with functioning governments. Therefore, what course should he take? Pef- haps the invaders even now ruled the homeland. Would he gain, or would he lose the last cha;ice for ultimate victory by setting off the explosive? During the rare moments when his mind Cleared, Koski realized the small chance the Campaign would have. At such times the Weapon beckoned. He knew then that the Campaign would never be completed in his lifetime. Wagner, however, was a very good man, with all the ideals of his country He would carry on. It needed only a slight variation in the trend of events, to tip that scale one way or the other. Even now the General held the bottle of aqua fords in his hand -- undecided. The fate of the world teetered. "You aren't so pretty anymore,' Wagner said. "Neither are you," Buckmaster answered through battered, bloody lips. He Wondered where he found the strength to keep taunting Wagner. He could feel that his face was a lumpy mess. One eye was closed and blood, running down into the other, kept blinding him. Every muscle in his body ached from the pounding it had taken, and he sus pected that his left arm was broken. He sagged in his bonds. Wagner, he knew, was deliberately gauging the punishment. He meant to torture him to the verge of death, but he did not intend to let him die without further torment. Buckmaster wondered how much more he could stand. Long ago he had despaired of any help from the Force. He had felt nothing since the torture started. It was evident that it couldn't do anything, or would not, to stop this orgy of sadism. And he knew that any subtle attempts to divert Wagner from his sadistic pleasure would be useless. Wagner had ail the instruments required for refined torture here. It was evident that he had used them many times in the past. He strapped Buckmaster's wrists to a waist-high wooden rack. "You'll be pleased to know that I have made a thorough study of the human anatomy," Wagner said. "Therefore, when I begin cutting off your limbs, one joint at a time, you won't have to worry. I'll see that you do not die -- and also that you retain consciousness. I wouldn't want you to miss the exquisite deli cacy with which I perform the operations. You'll be a basket case when I get through." Wagner picked up a short scalpel with an edge honed to a fine, razor sharpness. "This is a delicate little experiment that I find very effective," he said. He lifted Buckmaster's right index finger and cut deeply through the flesh' of its tip. The intense acuteness of the sensitive nerves made the agony unbearable. Wave after wave of shock sensations struck at his nerve fibers as the blade traced a raw red path through another finger-tip. Sickness gathered in his stomach and retched up into his throat to gag him. He sucked in great gulps of air until at last he could stand no more pain and welcome oblivion blanked him out. He returned to consciousness to no find Vagner still there -- waiting. "Tsk, tsk' Wagner chided. "So you're not so tough, after all? And just when it was getting interestThis time Buckmaster did not have the strength to defy him. He was beaten. He prayed that Wagner would tire of his pleasure before he had to stand any more. He wanted to go out still a man, and not a broken hulk, tearful, pleading, begging for mercy. "I think you're ready for something a bit more subtle," Wagner said. He concentrated his gaze on Buckmaster's eyes and slowly, cruelly built up a mental strain. The mind contact still held. Buckmaster realized that Wagner had been keeping this until he .was too mentally whipped to fight back. He was surprised then to feel that he fought off the pressure with little strain to himself. Still lurking there in his mind, was the Force, quiet, hardly felt, bdt virile, with a sense of dynamic quiescence potency! Hope came where all hope had been dead. Something within him throbbed like electricity, and he sent a bolt of mental energy at Wagner's head. The shock of the emotional concussion brought blood bursting from Wagner's nostrils and eye sockets. A red tide poured from his lips. His head dropped loosely and Buckmaster knew that Wagner was dead even before he fell from his chair. Buckmaster sat astounded at the demonstration of power. He sat for a moment listening to the. inner voice that sent up its answers to his silent questions. No, it hadn't been able to help him before. Its power was not physical. No, it could not help him escape. From here he was on his own. The only satisfaction he received was the closer entity he had found between himself and the Force. It seemed to him now that it did not come from the outside. Rather it was an essential part of himself. Or, more exactly, he was a part of that Force. Buckmaster worked his wrists backwards in their thongs until he forced the leather straps over the bases of his hands. Thus he was able to bend his wrists. Slowly, painfully, he brought up his right leg until his foot rested next to his right hand. The left foot next. Once he almost lost his balance. But at last he stood with his feet straddling his hands. He exerted all the strength of his leg, arm, and trunk muscles. The pain from his broken arm was a sickening thing but slowly the leather bands began to tear loose from the rivets that held them. A last mighty e;xertion and he was free. Wagner had a private elevator. Buckmaster entered and went to a ground floor. He walked out of the building through a tradesmen's entrance into a dusky alley. Keeping his good arm in front of his face he staggered around the corner and into a drugstore and reached a phone booth without being observed. He put in a call and crouched in the phone booth for the ten long minutes it took Oliver to come for him. "Two weeks aren't very long to get you well, Clifford," Oliver said, "but I'm afraid it's all the time we have I'm softy"' "You did yout best' Buckmaster answered "At least you've got m# pfetty well patched up." "The last reports Wete that the police have drawn a ring around this district and that they're closing in." "Do We have any Way out?" "I hate to have to say this Oliver said slowly. "But the rest of Us can get out -- if we don't take you with us." B uckmaster had expected this. It seemed that he had known from the beginning that he Would never live to see the end of this adventure. "It's all right. Is there anything I can do to help "No. They won't stop us if you aren't along You're the man they're after. If there were any way I could help you by staying, I'd never leave. But I'd only be captured with you, and nothing gained." "Of course I understand." Buckmaster rested his hand for a mo ment on the old leader's shoulder. "Don't feel badly about it Lester. The men need you. You owe it to them to get out if you can." Oliver gripped his hand. "Before I go I want you to know how grate ful we are for the help you've given us. Without Wagner the General won't be nearly as hard to handle And one other thing: I don't want you to hope too much, but there! still a chance we may be able to get you out. I'm trying a long shot. So if someone comes for you, go with himi In the meantime, keep your chin Up.' They shook hands again. Buck" master surmised that Oliver was trying to give him something to cling to while he waited for the end. Then he was alone. Three hours later Buckmaster spotted the first of his executioners f One of the Ruskies that walked with studied unconcern across the street Almost at the same time he heard a rap on the rear door of the apartment. He drew the gun Oliver had left with him and walked slowly to the door. "Who is it?" "Oliver sent me for you," the voice on the other side of the door answered. "Gome in with your hands up." Buckmaster flattened himself against a side wall and shoved hi! gun into the ribs of a tail young man. "Who are you?" "My name is August Gamoll' the man said. Somehow the name Was familiar. He diould recognize it, Buckmaster thought. Abruptly he did. "What are you trying to do?" Buckmaster asked harshly. "Maket a small-time hero of yourself with this grandstand play?" "Not at all," Gamoll answered "I'm the long shot Oliver mentioned." "You're lying." ' , "Then how would I know what Oliver said?" "It may be a lucky guess. Why should I trust you?" "Mainly because you have no choice. What have you got to lose?" He was a cool character. Buckmaster shrugged. He hated this playing it blind, but the fellow was right. he said. "You might as well take your hands down. Let's go." They went down the stairs. At the rear exit Gamoll looked out. He wore no hat. The wind from the alley fluffed the hair on the side of his head. "All clear " Gamoll said. "Make a dash for it. When you get in tiie carriage lie low. Now!" The die was cast, Buckmaster decided. He'd play It to the hilt now, all or nothing. He sprinted across the dirt of the alley and jerked open a door of the carriage. He threw himself inside and hugged the floor. Soon the carriage began to roll. When they had travelled about a half block it stopped. Buckpi aster drew in his breath. This was the critical point. If Gamoll could bluff his way through now the rest would be comparatively easy. "Give me an escort, Captain," he heard Gamoll say. "I don't want to get tied up here. I understand there's gQing to be some shooting soon." "That's right, sir," a crisp military voice answered. "It's best that you get out fast. I'll send one of my men with you." The carriage started forward again. A half-hour later it stopped once more. "You may get up now," Gamoll said. "We're going inside. Stay close to me." prised when he alighted and found himself near a side door to the General's private residence, "I don't get all this,"Buckmaster said. "You've had me here for six days now, and I've only seen you twice. Why should the General's son be hiding me?" "Quite simple. I don't like his methods, or his government, any more than you do. Oliver knew that when he sent his message to me asking for help." "Do you mean to say that you'd help us kill your own father?" "As to that," Gamoll said, "if you'll notice, my hair and eyes are brown. "So?" "Koski's eyes and my mother's are blue. You probably know that it is genetically impossible for twoblue-eyed people to have a browneyed son." "Then you're not his son?" Buckmaster was silent for a minute. "That's why you took the name of your mother's other husband," he mused. "If you remember, when the law was passed that each woman must have two husbands, the General set the example by marryipg a woman who already had a husband. He knows that I am not his son biologically, but I am legally, and I have full inheritance rights. He was too smart -- as well as legally exact -- to disown me." "That means you'd automatically become the government head if the General died?" "Yes. But you're wrong if you think that I am doing this from any selfish motive. If I succeed, I'll institute a democratic form of government at my first opportunity." "I'll wait until I see it" Buckmaster answered cynically. "But if It's true are your ideals strong enough to help us kill him?" For the first time Gamoll seemed uncertain of hirnself. "Why is it necessary to kill him, especially now that Wagner is dead? We both know that Wagner did the actual ruling. And the General is an old man, without much longer to live. We'll win if we do no more than stand by." "He must dieand soon!" Buck- master exclaimed" surprised at the vehemence of the words. So vital had been the command, that he knew what he had said was true: Koski must die, in the very near future. Though he himself was not certain of the need for such urgency. "I suppose I understand Gamoll said, a trifle uneasily. "You have to act in self-defense! If you don't kill him, he will probably be able to kill many more of your men before he dies. But try to see his side. He is the representative of a Cause that is just -- to his way of reasoning; so right and so just that he will do anything to advance it. Whatever we may think of him, hii conscience Is clear. I ofily ask you this! If you can See yoUT way clear to attain your ends without For another nine days Buckmaster stayed with Gamoll. He had nothing to occupy his time. In idle curiosity he went through the books in Gamoll's library. The young man owned many good booki Before long Buckmaster's idle brOwng turned to an intent search. For the first time he began finding clues to the mystery that rode with in him. His first clue, he thought, was a passage he read in a physics book entitled, "The Limitations of Sci ence," by Sullivan: Research has changed our whole conception of matter The first step was the perimental demonstration that there exist little electrified bodies, very much smaller than a hydrbgeri atom, called electrons Measurement was made with the result that the whoie mass of the electron was found to be due to its electric charge This was the first indication that the material universe is not the substantial, objective thing we had always taken it to be Mat ter began to thin away into the completely spectral thing it has now become. The notion of substance had to he replaced by the notion of behavior He passed readily from physics to the more fertile field of philosophy with the groping statement of Voltaire: I have seen that which is called matter both as the star Sirius, and as the smallest atom which can be perceived with the microscope; and I do not know What this matter is. He pursued this quest readily with the philosopher Schopenhauer and passed almost ' imperceptibly into metaphysics: I will never believe that even the simplest chemical combination wilt ever admit of mechanical explanation; much less the properties of light, heat, and electricity. These will always require a dynamical explanation. If we can ferret out the ultimate nature of our own fninds we shall perhaps have the key to the exief nd world. Let us say, then, that repulsion and attraction, combination and decomposition, magnetism and electricity, gravity and crystalliza tion, are Will. Will, then, is the essence of man. Now what if it is also the essence of life in all its forms, and even of Hnanimate matter? What if Will is the longsought'for, the longdespaired-of , Hhe thing-in-itself  -- the ultimate inner reality and se cret essence of all things? Buckmaster perceived that these men were catching glimpses of something which they called Will, Order, Thing, Absolute, and other names but which were all very probably the same thing -- and also that which he sought. Eagerly he read on. His next clue came from Bergson: Thought may begin with its object, and at last, in consistency, be driven, by the apparent necessities of logic, to conceive all things as forms and creatures of mind. Quickly he passed on to Spinoza where he found a wealth of food for thought. Is the body merely an idea? Is all the mentality that is scattered over space and time, a diffused consciousness that animates the. world? There is but one entity, seen now inwardly as mind, now outwardly as matter, but in reality an inextricable mixture and unity of both. Eternal order... that betokens the very structure of existence, underlying all events and things, and constituting the essence of the world. Substance is insubstantial, that it is form and not matter, that it had nothing to do with that mongrel and neuter composite of matter. Bruno said; All reality is one in substance, one in cause, one in origin; mind and matter are one. Descartes' conception of a homogeneous "substance" underlying all forms of matter intrigued him for a time, and he wrestled mentally with the classic quotation, I think, therefore I am. Berkeley wrote ; A thin is merely a bundle of perceptions -- i. fi., classified and interpreted sensations. Hegel: The Absolute, transcending the individual limitations and purposes, and catching, underneath the universal strife, the hidden harmony of all things. Reason is the substance of the universe. Leibniz; Although the whole of this life were said to be nothing but a dream, and the visible world nothing but a phantasm, I should call this dream or phantasm real enough, if, using reason well, we were never deceived by it. F or a time Buckmaster left the philosophers and read poetry. He found germs of what he sought in some of them, as Goethe's, The force which draws the lover, and the force which draws the planets are one. He found it beautifully in a stanza of Wordsworth's. Something Whose dwelling is the light of the setting suns, And the round ocean, and the living air,  And the blue sky, and the mind of man ; -- A motion and a spirit, all objects of all thought. And rolls through all things. In the main, however, he found in the poets that the grains of wheat wete too few amidst the chaff and Returned to philosophy. Most of these excerpts, he felt, were clues to the enigma of him self. He knew that these great minds had touched on the very mystery that puzzled him. Once again he felt on the verge of understanding. Did he have all the pieces? Could he fit them into the pattern, if he but knew how? Or must he need to learn more? Suddenly he found the explanation in a book of essays by, the incongruity of it struck him as ironical, an anonymous writer. He read : For a time, during the middle ages, the theory that all th world, and even the universe, were figments of one giant imagination, swayed the thinkers of the world. The intellect in which this imagination centered was focused in one man, and one man only, in the whole of existence. That man was the one fnan who Uhought. All other men all other matter, were but imagined props with no actual existence. That man is the one who Uhinks!' 'You -- and only "you, the person who is reading this -- in the whole world. It does not matter what your name might be. It might be...  Clifford Buckmaster knew then the mystery of life, who he was, and why. He no longer concentrated, but his eyes read on: At first glance it would seem that there is a con eerted conspiracy to avoid acknowledging this fact. Learned men, acquiring wisdom, come to the brink of the great discovery, and then deftly skirt it, blinding themselves to its evidentness. However, on second thought the reason is obvious, The theory is anarchistic ; it carries the seeds of its own futility. If they were ever to admit the truth of it, all reason for everything -- theit very discovery, their very thoughts -- would be futile. So they refuse to recognize it. Your obvious question is. How can I tell you this? Who am I -- the writer of this essay? The answer is quite simple. I am merely a figment of your imagination, as is everything else about you! At last he knew. His first sensation was one of awful, empty solitude. He was one creature -- alone. Alone in a universe! He was ah entity living in a dream world. All about him were the figments of an imagination -- presumably his own. And even knowing, he still had no control of events -- like a dream that cannot be halted or changed. The people about him were automatons, in fact they possessed no actual substance. Even his own body was but a figment -- but he could be hurt! He had experienced the most acute pain, and very probably he could be killed. He had, however, little time tb brood on it. At that instant in his reflections Gamoll jerked open the library door and walked in. "The worst has happened," he exclaimed. "The security police have caught Oliver' "What can we do?" Buckmaster still could not regard Gamoll, or Oliver and his friends, as nonentities. "I hate to say this," Gamoll said, "but you'll have to get out, I may be able to help Oliver escape, but I'll be powerless if they learn that I'm connected with the Underground." "They probably wouldn't hesitate to kill you also," Buckmaster said. "That wouldn't be too important, if my dying would accomplish anything," Gamoll said. "But the Underground's only hope seems to be my keeping clear." Slowly, almost unobtrusively, a vision rose up before Buckmaster's eyes. Gamoll's features clouded, became vague, and were gone. In his place stood the General. In the General's hand was a bottle, and before him a wooden frame, holding a metal box with its lid open. Buckmaster realized that what he was seeing was happening in some see cement walls in the room in which the General stood, Probably the basement, he thought. Within him the Force commanded! He must get to the General, and kill him. The world was on the brink of disaster. And time was running out. posite vision vanished and he saw the handsome features of Gamoll again. He knew .what he had to do now. "I'm leaving irhmediately," he said. Closing the library door behind him he walked unhesitatingly down a long hallway. To either side of him, painted on the walls, were murals, depicting peasants in the fields, harvesting grain. Idly he observed the painted figures as he walked, with his brain chilled and numbed of almost all emotion. The painted figures possessed as much reality as anything else about him, he thought disinterestedly. He w'alked down steps and across an inner courtyard, his legs moving stiffly, lifelessly. He continued up the steps on the far side of the courtyard, his mind shutting out everything around him except the door ahead. When he reached there he stopied. Here, he knew, he was at the crossroads. He could move straight ahead through the door, or he could walk around the house and enter the basement through the back. That was the longer way, but probably the safer. And the Force urged the second choice. A mood of black frustration swept over him and some perverse stubbornness of his human nature rebelled at this supine abnegation. He knew that he was going to die, and his one last defiant act would be to die in a way of his own choosing. He walked straight ahead. As he opened the door and stepped into a long green-carpeted room he found himself facing three guards. They held guns and the guns were all aimed at him. Even before he observed that the guards were firing, he felt the killing slugs enter his body. He knew the bullets had reached vital organs and that he was about to die. Within him he felt the Force, angry and rebuking. He felt a wrench at the cote of his body structure -- and he was walking -- walking -- endlessly -- down a long corridor. On the walls to either side of him were the figures of harvesters painted on yellow murals. His body was alive and vital. He walked on, through a doorway and out into a courtyard before he realized what had happened. The Force had turned time backward! He was once mote on his way to shoot Koski. He was exactly the same as he had been the last time but with the addition of his memories of having been shot. And the silent warning that came to him never to expect another second chance. That could not be repeated. This time when he came to the fatal door there was no surge of rebellion and he did not hesitate. He walked around the house until he came to the basement entrance. Cement steps led downward. Two guards were waiting for him there. One guard fell as Buckmaster fired, but he knew with a terrible Certainty that he would not be able to kill the other in time to save himself. The guard's bullet crashed into Buckmasters diaphragm and his body jerked once but it did not stop its determined pacing forward. Buckmaster fired again but even as he did he felt a second bullet enter his body. It pierced his heart and he knew that he was dead. With dimming vision he watched the guard fall over on his side as his own bullet found its mark. Even as Buckmaster realised that the bitter fever of lif was over fdr him he knew that his body Would not stop. Without any directive frorn the brain it was using the last of the suspended energy in its blood and muscles to walk forward, driving with ah awful exertion. On he walked into the cement lined room. The General stood there, oblivious to the noise about him. The hair on the crown of his head parted violently as the bullet from the guri in Buckmaster's hand hfts mark. The gun became a weight too heavy for Buckmaster' s lifeless fingers and dropped to the floor. The last spark of life flickered for a brief moment where it had fled ih some inner recess of his brain and he felt the Force for the last time. Two words it spoke. "Well done," and he knew that at last his job was finished. Now he would return home! B uckmaster had reasoned well, considering his natural limitations. But the ttuth he had discovered was, like most truths, only part of a greater truth. In the far reaches of infinity, beyond the outermost boundaries of space, a thoughtvoice spoke. "Am I going to die?" it asked. "Not now,' a second entity answered. "The crisis is past." 'Will the sickness come again ?' "Not this particular form of rrialevolent psychosis," the second entity replied. "But perhaps you had better tell me all the facts you know so that I can advise you about the future." "My project, I still believe, was magnificent," the sick entity began. "From the energy of my essence I materialized a world of infinitesimal creatures. I gave them time and space, and built a background of a universe for their wonderment and speculation. They dwelt on their world, lived their lives, and made their tiny, though admirable, advances as they saw their destiny. And then, suddenly, when all seemed beautiful, something went wrong, and I was ill unto death. What did I do that was not right?" "I believe you made your mistake when you gave your creatures free will. 'They developed their malignancies, as well as their admirabilities. When they developed a malignancy of such virulence that they were in a position to destroy themselves, you made yourself vulnerable to death, through them. The shock of that devastation to you would have killed you. Tell me, weYe your creatures aware that they were figments of your mind?" "Some grasped inklings of it, though none were certain. One, a Baruch Spinoza, came as close to the truth as it was possible, for their finite minds. He wrote: We are the flitting forms of a being greater than ourselves and endless while We die. Our bodies are cells in the body of the race, our race is an incident in the drama' of life; our minds are the fitful flashes of an eternal light. Our mind, in so far as it understands, is an eternal mode of thinking, which is determined by another mode of thinking, and this one again by another, anfl so on to infinity. That was magnificant. While others who caught inklings of the truth believed that I was an ultimate being, he realized that I, too, had an ultimate being whom I j worshipped." j "Also, if he had been able to per ceive how close you were to death," I the second entity said, "he would  have realized that you were mortal,  which no ultimate being can be." "How were you able to circumvent the disaster that so nearly befell me?" "I sent a segment of my own mentality into your conceived world. I gave it a name, implanted a memory of a past into its mind, ' and that same memory into the ! minds of those creatures with whom ; it was supposed to have come into contact, in its past. Through that i segment I was able to destroy the awful potentiality, as well as the creature who controlled it. The ; secret now rests with the dead." "Is there any chance of a similar  recurrence?" "That chance will always exist j as long as you persist in allowing your creatures to have free will. I i would advise you to destroy it." For a time the patient was silent. "No," it said finally, "without that free will their existence and my entire project would be futile. I will let the free will remain and bear any consequences."  "That, of course, is your own choosing," the other said. And so man kept his greatest possession. By Ezra Shaw The Eterfidl Riddle What kind of life? Does it exist in any one of th forms recognizable to us? Or does the spirit of life -- "if any -- which may emanate elsewhere than on Earth breed a species totally unfamiliar to anything we can possibly imagine? Before looking for the answel to these questions, it is necessary to know certain facts ut the makeup of the planets. First -- do they have atmosphere? Atmosphere consists of a body of gases -- an aggregation of molecules in a state of perpetual motion -- surrounding a planet. The density of the gaseous atmosphere of the Earth or of any other planet decreases with an increasing distance from the surface of the planet. Near the upper limit of the atmosphere, where the density is very low, the molecules will travel for a considerable distance between collisions with other molecules If a molecule in this region happens to rebound after a collision in an outward direction and with a speed much greater than the average speed, it may escape into outer space, provided that it does not come into collision with any other molecule. For any particle, whether large or small, to be able to escape altogether, it is necessary that its velocity exceed a certain critical value -- the velocity of escape. This value is important in considering planetary atmospheres. tain height falls to the ground with an accelerated velocity because of the attracting force of gravity. If the stone is projected upwards with a velocity equal to that at which it hits the ground, its velocity will progressively decrease. Now -- forgetting gravitational attractions of other bodies in the atmosphereif the stone is dropped towards Earth from an infinitely great height, it will fall with a gradually increasing velocity which, when it reaches the ground, will have a definite velocity value. Using ,"V" as the velocity value, "G" as the Value of the constant of gravitation, "M" for the mass of the Earth and as its radius ; equals #GMrf Now, if the stone is projected upwards with a force equal to the velocity V, it will reach an infinitely great distance before it comes to rest ; if it is projected with a velocity less than V, it will eventually come to rest and then, fall back to Earth, because any velocity less than V corresponds to the velocity acquired in falling to the ground from a height that is finite. Thus, the stone can only get completely away from the Earth if its initial velocity is equal to or greater than V. This is why V is called the "velocity of escape". To determine the velocity necessary for any body to escape from the Earth, simply substitute the values for the constant of gravitation, and for the mass and radius of the Earth. In this way it can be found that the velocity of escape from the Earth is #.I miles a second. N ot a single molecule of the Earth's atmosphere can possibly escape into outer space unless its velocity exceeds the escape velocity. But whenever a molecule rebounds away from the Earth with a speed greater than the escape velocity, it will escape from the Earth's gravitation, provided that it does not collide with any other molecule. A loss of the faster moving molecules from the outer layers of the atmosphere is inevitable. There are various tnathematical principles concerning the velocity of escape of a molecule from its atmosphere. The actual calculations were made some years ago by Sir James Jeans, who found that if the velocity of escape is four times the average molecular velocity, the atmosphere would be practically completely lost in # years. If the velocity of escape is four and a half times the average molecular velocity, the atmosphere would be lost in # years. If the velocity of escape is five times the average molecular velocity, # quired for complete loss. On the basis of these figures, then, the large planets as Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, may j be expected to have atmosphere  much more extensive than that of Earth. Venus' would be comparaI ble to Earth's. The atmosphere of  Mars is probably considerably thin ner than that of Earth, while Mer; cury and the Moon would have ; little or no atmosphere. j The Spectroscope  Assuming that a planet has i z  an atmosphere, the spectroI scope is used to study the compKJsir  tion of the planet. This instrument contains one or more prisms, the light from the planet is passed , through the spectroscope, and ; spreads out into a band or spectrum i showing the colors of the rainbow. Each point in the spectrum correj sponds to the definite wave-length. If sunlight is being analyzed --  the light being admitted through a : narrow slit -- the spectrum becomes  crossed by thousands of fine dark lines, each of which corresponds to ' a definite wave-length and a definite intensity. When an electric spark from between two pieces of iron is piassed through, the spectrum shows a considerable number of bright lines, spaced at irregular intervals and of different intensities. This particular series of lines is produced by no other element but iron. In a similar way, every other element has its own characteristic spectrum. If light from a hot in. candescent source which has a continuous spectrum showing all the colors of the rainbow is passed through the vapor of iron at a lower temperature, the continuous spectrum of the hot source will be crossed by a number of dark lines, each of which is exactly identical in wave-length with one of the bright lines in the spectrum of the incandescent iron vapor. Such a spectrum is called an absorption spectrum. The lines in the spectrum of the Sun are of this nature. The hot interior of the Sun would give a continuous spectrum, but the cooler outer layers absorb the radiations of various wave-lengths, thus producing the dark lines. These fine dark lines are known as the Fraunhofer lines -- so named after the physicist who first investigated them. Investigation of the spectrum of sunlight proves that iron is contained in the Sun. Similarly, the presence of many other elements are detected, as well as some fairly reliable conclusions as to their abundance. The Effect of Atmosphere however, enters into the analysis of light from the Sun. Since we make our observations from the bottom of Earth's atmosphere, the light from the Sun has to pass through this atmosphere before it reaches us, and some of it is of necessity absorbed in the atmosphere. Consequently, some of the absorption lines that are present in the observed spectrum of the Sun do not originate in the Sun, but in Earth's atmosphere. Of particular importance is the absorption produced by the small amount of ozone in the atmosphere. This is so strong that all of the light of wave-length shorter than # inch is completely absorbed, and none of the light in this region -- the ultra-violet region of the spectrum -- is accessible to observation. In analyzing the spectrum of the Sun, the question arises regarding both the absorptions that originate in the Sun itself and those that are produced by Earth's atmosphere. There are two ways in which the absorptions of terrestrial origin can be identified: ( I ) Compare the spectra of the Sun taken at different altitudes. The lower the altitude of the Sun, the longer the path that the light from the Sun has to travel through the atmosphere in order to reach Earth. (#) Compare the spectra of light from the east and west limbs of the Sun. Since the Sun rotates on its axis in about # days, the west limb is moving away from Earth while the east limb moves towards us. There is a slight separation between the corresponding absorptions in the light from the two regions. The absorptions that originate in our atmosphere are not affected by the Sun's rotations; these coincide in position in the spectra of the light from the two opposite limbs. If, then, the spectra of the eastern and western limbs of the Sun are photographed simultaneously or in immediate succession on the same plate, the absorptions of Earth origin can be immediately picked out, because they consist of all tKe obSofptions that coincide in position in the two spectra. advantageous than the first because it does not necessitate the comparison of spectra obtained at different altitudes and at different times. The planets are cool bodies having no intrinsic light of their own. A planet is seen only by means of the light from the Sun that falls upon it and is reflected. As the sunlight penetrates into the atmosphere of the planet, it is partially scat tered and partially absorbed. The depth to which it penetrates depends upon the nature and extent of the atmosphere; in some cases the light may not even reach to the surface of the planet. Since the light will bear some impress of its passage into and out of the atmosphere of the planet, when it is analysed by the spectroscope, absorptions that have originated in the atmosphere of the planet may be revealed which will give some clues to the nature of the atmosphere. An absorption in the atmosphere of the planet that does not correspond with any absorptions produced in the atmosphere of the Earth will be easily noted. Where, however, the absorptions will coincide with those produced by the same substances in the Earth's atmosphere, care is required to decide whether these ise in the atmosphere of the Earth, or whether they include the effect of absorptions originating in the atmosphere of the other planet. The two substances whose presence in the planetary atmosphere is of the greatest significance for the possibility of the existence of life, are oxygen and water vapor, and it these two substances whose presence may be most difficult to establish. There are two methods to distinguish whether an absorption is of terrestrial origin or of planetary origin : ( I ) Compare the spectrum of the planet with that of the Moon, obtaining the two on the same night and as nearly as possible to the same time, and at equal altitudes. Since the Moon is devoid of atmosphere, if any absorption is present it must originate in that of the planet. (#) The second method is based on the displacement of the absorption lines in the light from a moving source at a time when the planet is approaching or receding from the Earth most rapidly. The relative motion will displace the absorption due to the planet's atmosphere with respect to those due to our own atmosphere, and in this way it is possible to detect planetary absorptions of low intensity. This method is a very delicate one, and is especially useful for deciding whether substances that are present in our owti atmosphere are also present in the atmosphere of the other planet. temperature -- a Decisive Factor possibility of life on a particular planet, it is necessary that we have some general idea of its temperature conditions. Mercury -- which has very little or no atmosphere -- always keeps the same side toward the Sun. Suppose this planet has no heat output of its own, but that there is an exact balance between the heat that it receives from the Sun and that which it radiates into space. It would be simple to estimate the temperature of its surface by figuring according to Stefan's law -- that the total radiation from a body is proportioned to the fourth power of its absolute temperature. Using this observed value and equating the energy received and radiated, the highest temperature at any point on the surface of a planet that always turns the same face to the Sun, can be found, provided that the planet has no atmosphere and that it is a body that completely absorbs all the radiations falling on it. The dark side of the planet which receives no heat from thp Sun would be extremely cold. If the planet does not always turn the same side to the Sun, the effect of its rotation would be to lower the noonday temperature and to raise the night temperature. The faster the rotation, the smaller the difference between the day and night temperatures. For a sufficiently fast rotation, there would be no difference between day and night temperatures at any place on the planet; there would be, however, a variation of temperature with latitude, because the average rate of reception of heat from the Sun depends on the latitude. fects come into play on a planet that possess an atmosphere and, as on Earth, temperatures at any one place may differ considerably from day to day. The general  effect of an atmosphere, ,then, is a smoothing-out of the temperature differences between day and night, because there will be a persistent tendency for heat to be carried from the warmer to the cooler parts of the surface by warm air moving into colder regions and cold air moving into warmer regions. Too, the atmosphere of the Earth, and probably most planetary atmospheres, are opaque in many regions of the infra-red, corresponding to long wave-length radiations. Most of the solar heat is transmitted by the atmosphere, warming the surface of the planet, and much of this heat is radiated again as radiation of considerably longer wave-length, to which the atmosphere is opaque. The temperature is therefore raised considerably. The atmosphere exerts a blanketing effect by preventing the escape of the radiations of long wave-length. Then the fall of temperature at night become less rapid. The Nature and Use of the Bolometer junction with a sensitive detector of radiation, is used to measure the radiation received on the Earth from the planets. A bolometer or a thermocouple may be used for detecting and measuring the radiation. In the bolometer, the radiant energy is focused on to a minute strip of, platinum which forms one arm of an electrical circuit known as a Wheatstone's bridge. A similar strip, shielded from the radiation, forms a second arm of# the bridge, which is bah anced against the first. When the radiant energy falls on the first arm of the bridge, it is heated, its resistance is increased, the balance of the bridge is upset and a current flows through the galvanometer of the bridge. The deflection of the galvanometer provides a measure of the intensity of the radiation falling on the bolometer. The thermocouple consists of a small junction of two tiny .strips of different metals. When the junction is heated, a thermoelectric current, whose strength is proportional to the intensity of the radiation, flows through the circuit and is measured by a sensitive galvanometer. A highly sensitive thermocouple will detect the heat from a candle at a distance of three miles bolometer provides a measure of the total radiation from the planetj as modified by absorption in the Earth's atmosphere. A slight correction must be applied to the measures to allow for this effect. A measure of the total planetary radiation is obtained when it is applied. This consists in part of reflected sunlight and in part of the lowtemperature longwave radiation from the planet itself. It is the latter portion that provides inforfnation about the planet's temperature. It is necessary, therefore, to separate it from the portion that is merely reflected sunlight. The separation is easily effected by placing a small transparent vessel containing water in the path of the rays. The water transmits the portion of the radiation of relatively short waVe-length -- the reflected sunlight portion but hi opaque to the long-wave planetary portion Thus, the true heat radiation from the planet is measured. If atmosphere and ternperatufe have a similarity to that of Earth's, we can safely assume that the planet has life similar to that here on Earth. But if these factors vary in any great degree, then living matter if such etists -- will be in, a nature of which we have no knowledge. Ten miracles were arranged for the agelong flight. But they reckoned without T he seventh tub shook gently, stimulating the hypothalamic region of Eric's brain for the first time in almost two centuries. After a time, his limbs trembled and his body began to shiver. The liquid in which he floated boiled off at a temperature still far below that which would permit his body to function. By the time all the liquid was gone he had uncurled and lay at the bottom of the tub. Now his heart pumped three hundred times a minute, generating warmth and activating his central nervous system. It took many hours for his heart to slow -- not back to the one beat every two minutes it had known for a hundred-seventy five years, but to the normal rate of about seventy per minute. By then his body temperature had climbed from below freezing to # F. Eric lay in stupor for a week, while fluids flowed into the tub and massaged his muscles, while fatty tissue slowly turned into strength. Finally, he climbed from his tub. He found the locker which bore his name, and opened it. Six other lockers were open and empty, as were six tubs. He found that hard to believe. It had seemed only a night of deep and dreamless sleep, no more. But each empty tub stood for twenty-five years, each open locker meant a man had gone and lived his time with the new generations of the ship, perhaps had sired children, had died with old age.  Eric found his clothing on a At intervals of twenty-five years, they would arise to police the ship. hook, took it down. Yesterday -- he laughed mirthlessly when he realized that had been almost two hundred years ago -- Clair had told him something about a note. He found it in the breast pocket of his jumper, stiff and yellow. He read: Darling: I will he ashes in the void between the stars when you read this. That sounds silly, but ifs the truth -- unless I can give old Methuselah a run for his money; I sadden when I think that you will be gone tomorrow, the same as dead. But if they need ten and if you are one who can withstand suspension -- what can we do? Know that my love goes with you across the ages, Eric. I just thought of something. Youll be the seventh of ten, with the last one coming out at planetfall. If you live to be a real graybeard, you might even see the landing on the Centaurian planet. I love you. Clair -- If Clair had married, her great grandchildren might be alivmow. Her great great grandchildren would be Eric's age. Clair's progeny, not Clair -- because Clair was dust now, a light year back in space -- He found a package of cigarettes in his jumper, took one out and lit it. He must not think, of the past, not when it was only history now although he still felt very much a part of it. Today mattered, today and the new generations on the ship. It crossed his mind that they might regard him almost as a god, a man who had seen Earth, who had slept while generations lived and died, who came from his impossible sleep and would live with them now to see that everything was going according to plan. Three minutes after he started the mechanism, the door slid ponderously into the wall. It would open more simply from the other side, he knew, but then only Eric and the three who still slept could turn its complex tumblers. For a long while he stood there on the threshold and then he watched the door slide back into place. soft white light, which meant it was daytime on the ship. Dimly in the distance, Eric heard voices, children at play. Would they know of him? Would their parents know? Was he expected? Eric came closer. Through a doorway he could see the children, three of them, although they had not yet seen him. A chubby, frecklefaced boy said : "Let's play Lazarus. I must be the Captain, and you, Janie, you can be the crew. George, you be Lazarus." George was a big ten-year-old with dark hair. "Like heck I will! It was your idea, you be Lazarus, smart guy." Eric stepped through the doorway. "Hello," he said. "Gan you take me to your folks?" "Who're you. Mister?" "Hey, I don't know him I Where'd he come from?" The girl, Janie, said, "Lookit his clothes. Lookit. They're different." The children wore loose tunics. pastel-tinted, to their kilees. Freckle-Face said: "You know what today is, doncha?" George frowned. "Yeah, holiday We're off from school." "What holiday, stupid? Which one?" "I -- I dunno." "Lazzy-day!" Janie cried, "That's what it is. Then he's --  he's -- " "Lazarus!" Freckle-Face told her, and, as if on One inipulse, the three of them bolted away from Eric, disappeared through another doorway. He did not follow them. He stood there, waiting, and before long he heard footsteps returning. A man entered the room, tall, thin, middleaged. "You are Eric Taine," he said, smiling. "I'm sorry no one was around to greet you, but the way We had it figured, yOu wouldn't come out till later this afternoon. History says that's how it worked with the six before you, about fouf P.M. It's just noon now. Will yoU follow me, please?" Then the man flushed faintly. "Excuse me, but it isn't often we meet strangers. Everyone knows everyone else of course. My name is Lindquist, Mr. Taine. Roger Lindquist." Eric shook hands with him, stiffly, and he thought for a moment the man did not know the gesture, "Ah yes, handshaking," Lindquist laughed. "We simply show empty palms iiow, you know. But then, you don't know. I rather imagine you'll have a lot to learrt." Eric nodded, asked Lindquist ii he might be shown about the hip. There was a lot he had to see, td check, to change if change were needed. "Relax, my friend," Lindquist told him. "I'd -- ah, like to suggest that we postpone your tour until you've met with our Council this afternoon. I'd very much like to suggest that." Eric shrugged, saidt "You know more about this than I do, Mr. Lindquist. We'll wait for ' your . Council meeting." X Captain Larkinj hours later, "tradition has it that you become a king. King Lazarus Seven -- with six Lazaruses before you. The first one, the histories say, was a joke. But it's stuck ever since. The people like this idea of a king who coitiea to them every twenty five years --  and they've dubbed him with the name Lazarus, well, because if he didn't come back from the dead, he came back from something a lot like it." Efft nodded. "What happened to Alan Bridges?" "Who?" This was Lindquist "Alan Bridges, the man before me -- your Lazarus Six." Captain Larkin cleared his throat. "He's dead, Mr. Taine." "Dead? He'd only be in his fifties now -- " "I know. Sad. It was disease, hit him soon after he came to us. Lazarus Six had a very short reign. Didn't he, Mr. Lindquist?" "He certainly did," Lindquist agreed. "Let's hope that Lazarus Seven is here to step down for Eight-and to Watch Nine come in, fifty years from now!" Cheers filled the room and Eric smiled briefly. That reminded him of Clair's note. Clair -- "So," said Captain Larkin, "you'll be crowned tomorrow. After that, your people will see you. King Lazarus Seven on his throne. Don't disappoint us, Mr. Taine. Their tradition means a lot to them." "It should," Eric said. "The planners made it that way. With nothing but space outside, and the confining walls of the ship, they needed something to bind them together." "Yes,that's true. But the people, as you'll see, have come up with some of their own traditions over the years." Captain Larkin ran a hand through his graying hair. "Like your kinghood, for example. You'll see, Mr. Taine -- or should it be Lazarus now, eh?" He laughed. "If you'd like," Eric said. He did not relish the idea particularly, but then, it was their show. Still, he had everything to check -- from as t rogation to ethics -- and he would not want to be delayed by pomp and ceremony. Well, there was time enough for that. Now he felt weary -- and that made him chuckle, because he had just concluded a hundred-seventy five year nap. They took him to his quarters, where the six before him had lived. There he ate in silence, food from the hydroponic gardens on a lower level of the ship. The line of light under his door had turned from white to a soft blue. It was night on the ship. Eric showered and got into bed, but although he was tired he could not fall asleep. He had expected to be an efficiency expert of sorts ; that was his job ; but they told him, matter-of-factly, that he would be a king. Well, you could expect change in nearly two hundred years, radical change. And if indeed their tradition were deep-rooted, he would not try to change it. The planners had counted on that to keep them going, because there could be no environmental challenge to goad them. Just an unreal past and an unreal Earth which Eric and their great-great grandparents had seen, and an even more unreal future when, someday far far off, the ship reached the Centaurian System. Softly, someone knocked at his door. The sound had been there for many moments, a gentle tapping, but it had not registered on his consciousness. Now, when it did, he padded across the bare floor and opened the door, A girl stepped in from the corridor, pushing him before her with one hand, motioning him to silence with the other. She closed the door softly behind her, soundlessly almost, and turned to face him. She wore the knee-length tunic popular with this generation, and it covered a graceful feminine figure. Ju "Please listen to me, Eric Taine. I may have only a few moments -- listen!" "Sure," he smiled, "But why all the mystery?" "Shh! Let me talk Have you a weapon?" "Yes, I carry a pistol. I don't fancy I'll need it, though." "Well, take it with you and go back where you came. If anyone tries to stop you, use your weapon They have nothing like it. Then, when you get there -- " Her voice came breathlessly, and it made Eric laugh. "Hold on, Miss. Why should I do that? Don't tell me there's a plot and someone wants to usurp the new king before he's crowned? No? What then?" "Stop making fun of rAe, Eric Taine. I'm trying to save yer life" lShe said it so seriously, her eyes so big and round, that Eric half wanted to believe her. But that was fantastic. From what could she possibly be saving him? The words came out in a rush as the girl spoke again. "The ship is not on course. For twenty five years it has been off, heading back to Earth -- " "To Earth! That's crazy." "Listen, please. They killed Lazarus Six. He was a scapegoat. They watched the old films of Earth and felt they had been cheated out of their birthright. Why should they live here, alone in spate? they said. Why should their children's children face the hardships of a new world? They didn't ask for it. It was thrust upon them by the planners, by your generation. If they knew how to get into your room of tubs, they would have killed you. Now there is a mock ceremony, everything is blamed on the new  Lazarus and the people feel better when he is killed. I know, my mother told me. You can ask her -- " The girl was about twenty, Eric thought. A wild-eyed thing now, who so wanted him to believe her impossible story. Her breath came quickly, in little gasps, and Eric tried to hide the smile on his face. "You're laughing at me! Stupid, stupid -- please -- And when you get back to your room of tubs, awaken your friends, the three who remain. You four can control the ship, put it back on course, teach the people -- Ooo, stop laughing!" She pouted prettily "All of us, we're not all like that. We who are not can help you." Eric chuckled softly. "You try to picture it," he told her, "I'm sorry, but everything's been sweetness and light, and you come in here with a wild notion -- " "It isn't wild, it's the truth. Why don't you ask to check our course before they make you king?" He could do that, all right. But they'd be wondering what mad neurosis copipelled his actions, and he did not Want that, not when he might have so much to do "Check it," she pleaded. And when he shook his head, she told him, "You're acting like a child, you know. The records say you are twenty-five, and you've slept for seven times that, but still. All you have to do is check Please -- " The door burst in upon them and Lindquist stood there, With Captain Larkin and twp others. Lindquist shook his head sadly. "I thought so," he said. Captain Larkin nodded. "A Cultist child. Shame, isn't it?" One of the other men strode forward, and the girl cowered behind Eric. "Don't believe them!" she wailed. "Lies -- ' "There are so many of them," Lindquist explained. "Apparently, we're in an area of high radiation now, Mr. Taine. So many of our people are deranged. I won't guess at the cause, except to say it's probably outside the ship." The man came around Eric, tchtch'd when the girl jurrped on the bed and stood trembling against the headboard. "Now, Laurie," the man coaxed. "Come on down, there's a good girl." Eric wanted to help her, but he checked the impulse. He only felt protective. There could be nothing in the girl's story. Best if they took her and treated her. "... a whole cult of them," Lindquist was saying. "All lacking something up here." He tapped his head. "They don't trust anyone, only members. Think we're doing all sorts of foolish things. I don't know, what would you call it in your day. Paranoia?" Eric said he didn't know, he was not a psychologist. He watched silently with Lindquist and Captain Larkin as the two other men took Laurie, struggling, out the door. She kicked, bit, and cried lustily. Once her dark eyes caught Eric's gaze, held it, and she whimpered, "I don't care if they kill you! I don't care -- " They started down the corridor, after Lindquist said, "You've had a hard day. I think we'd better let you sleep." "She told you someone wanted to kill you?" Captain Larkin said, shaking his head slowly. "What can we do, Lindquist?" "Well, we just better hope whatever's causing this sort of thing is left behind in space soon. Goodnight Mr. Taine." "Goodnight, Lazarus," said Captain Larkin. E ric recognized at once the great hall in which he had danced that last night with Clair. Ipw Clair was gone. The place was crowded -- probably the ship's entire population. Lindquist led him through the crowd, and he could not tell what their faces showed. There were mumblings of "Lazarus" and "king" -- but why did he get the faint suggestion of mockery? Oddly, what Laurie said had troubled him -- he had had a bad night's sleep, and it left him irritable. Poor girl. He wondered how many more there were like her. Well, in time he could find out, after this nuisance of a coronation had become history. "Ah, Taine," Captain Larkin said as Lindquist brought him to the dais. "As you can see, all the people are ready. I hope you won't think the ceremony foolish. Are you ready?" Eric nodded, watched a man raise trumpet to lips, blow one clarion note. A hush fell over the hall. "I am honored to present King Lazarus Seven to you," Larkin proclaimed in a loud clear voice. "He has been sent, as you know, by the planners." Hoots from the crowd. Eric frowned. He had thought they would respect the planners, the men whose vision had sent Man -- here in this ship -- outward bound to the stars. Larkin's voice was honey now. "Don't judge our new king by those who s#til him Don't -- " Laughter, and shouts of "Hailj Lazarus!" The people, Eric suddenly realized, were almost primitive, Larkin and Lindquist and a handful of others ran the ship, had somehow maintained the science of another generation. But the lack f conflict, of challenge, had sent the people down a rung or two on the ladder of civilization. Handpicked, their ancestors had been -- but they were a common mob Someone cried, "He's seen Earth. Ask him to tell us about Earth!" "Ask himVl Captain Larkin smiled. "Tell them, Taine. Tell your new subjects. You have so little time." "What do you mean, so little time?" . "Tell them!" And Larkin turned away, laughing. They were primitive, these people, and as the girl Laurie had said, they needed a scapegoat. They didn't like it here on the ship. There had been a first generation which had known Earth and could savor its flavor through the long years like a delicate wine, And there Would be a last which could get out on the Centaurian planet, stretch its legs, and build civilization anew. But these in between were in limbo. They lived and they died on the ship, and it wasn't their idea. They would breed so that the ship would still have a crew when it reached Gentauri. That was their function. But they didn't like it. All this went through Eric's mind. Perhaps the girl had no psychosis, perhaps her warning had been sincere. He wondered if the loner sleen had dulled his instincts. his reflexes He told them of Earth, of its wonders, of the wide meadows he remembered, of the wind, brisk in spring, which brought the sweet scented rain, of summer and the big harvest moon which followed, of a hundred other things. Glair! Clair! Did yoU marry  have children? There was that Lou Sorfiebody who youd flirt with to mdke me jealous, hut we both knew he loved you, I wonder He spoke of the planners, of the proud day when all the world had seen them off, the video jets flashing by, circling, to send their picThe planners, he told them, had a vision. It was the same vision which had first taken man -- an ape with a brain that held curious half formed thoughts that gave him a headache -- down from the trees. A vision which would Carry him one day to the farthest stars and beyond. They shouted. They stamped oh the floor. They laughed. "What about us? We didn't have any say, did we? Who wants to spend his whole life in this tin can?" "I don't know -- " One of them at least was dubious, but the crowd stilled him. What of Laurie and her Cult? He did not see the girl anywhere in the great hall. "We've had enough, Captain. Too much, I'd say!" Larkin looked smug. Lindquist was grinning. No one did anything to stop them as the qrowd surged forward, threatened. Watching them only now beginning to realize the whole things Eric remembered history. Mock-kinghood was nothing new in the scheme of primitive cultures. In ancient Babylonia, in Assyria -- elsewhere -- The mock king ruled for a day and the people came to him with their troubles. The king, cowering on his throne-of-a-day could perhaps sec his executioner waiting. The real king had nothing to lose: the pent up dissatisfaction of his people would drown the mock-ruler like a wave, and after it was all over the king would return to his throne with more power than before. R ough hands reached up, grabbed at him. Fists shook, voice;# threatened. Someone pulled his boot, and Eric sat down on the dais, breathing heavily. He got up fast, before they could swarm all over him, yanked the gun from his jumper, poked it against Larkin's ribs. "You know what this is?" "Yes -- a gun." "Well, call your friends off or I'll kill you. I'm not' joking, Larkin. Call them off -- " 'T can't. Look at them, a mob. What can I do now?" "You'd better do something, because soon you won't have a chance to do anything. Now!" Larkin made a motion to the trumpeteer. He blew two loud notes this time, and uniformed men appeared, brandishing clubs. Evidently, they were on hand in case the crowd became too wild, threatened Larkin, Lindquist and the other nameless rulers. With their clubs they beat the mob back, slowly, held them off as Eric pushed Larkin before him. The crowd surged close, fought once or twice with the guards on their immediate flanks. Once Larkin tried to bolt away, but thereafter Eric held him firmly until they reached an exit. Together they sprinted down a corridor, Larkin puffing and staggering. "Beat it," Eric told him. "Go on, scram!" "You won't kill me as I run? I know that thing can kill over long distances -- " "Don't give me any ideas," Eric said, but he felt a little sick as Larkin ran, whimpering, back toward the ha,ll. This man was their ruler, their leader. He found the door, activated its mechanism, waited impatiently while he heard the sounds of pursuit. Something clanged against the door, and again. They were throwing things. Eric ducked, felt pain stab at his shoulder. He could see their faces in the corridor when the door began to slide clear. He slipped in, punched the levers that would close it again, saw a hand and a leg come through the crack, heard a scream. The limbs withdrew, and Eric watched grimly as it slid all the way shut. Lazaruses Eight, Nine, and Ten, he thought, as he went to the three remaining tubs. For a moment he gazed down through the pinkish liquid at the men curled up, sleeping their long sleep. He shook the tubs gently. All it would take was that -- direct rnotion. Once that had started the cycle, each sleeper's hypothalamus took over, twentyfive, fifty, and seventy-five years ahead of schedule He watched them twitch, shiver, slowly uncurl, watched the vapors rising from theii; tubs. He had plenty of time. In a week, he helped them from their tubs. They were ready to listen -- smiling baby-faced Chambers, gaunt Striker, rotund Richardson. He ecplained, slowly. He told them eveiything. "My God," Striker said when he had finished. "Be thankful you could get back here, lad," Richardson told him. "What do we do now?" "What can we do?" Chambers demanded. Then: "Will you look at that -- a hundred seventjy five years and I haven't even grown a beard!" They all laughed, and the tension was broken. "We go back," Eric said, "armed to the teeth. It won't be difficult. Some of them will die, but we can set the ship on its course again, teach them -- I'd hate to see the disappointment on Earth if we went back after six generations." Striker frowned. "Have we the right to kill?' Eric said, "look -- they might get back to Earth someday -- their progeny a bunch of savages; the hope and dreams of the race reduced tp -- nothing. We can kill if we have to." It was agreed. Without saying anything,' Striker himself activated the lock. them in the corridor, howling  "Lazarus" and "death." It was Striker who shot them where they stood, before they could use the ; clubs. After that, they fired shots into the air, and people ran screaming away from them. Their first rush carried them almost to the control room and briefly Eric remembered when he had looked out from there with Clair at the bright faraway stars. But he could not quite picture j Clair's face. He tried to, but he saw j the girl, Laurie... j A dozen uniformed men stood  before the control room. They  looked badly frightened, but they i stood their grouncf, then advanced.  "What do we do now?" Chambers asked. "We couldn't get them all, not before -- " There was a rush behind them as a score of figures marched into the corridor "We're trapped!" Striker cried. Eric grinned. "I don't think so." He had seen Laurie in the vanguard of the newcomers. They did not have to use their guns, not as they had been meant to be used. They fought with tooth and nail, using the guns as clubs. But mostly, they stood back and watched their allies tedr into the guards. The girl Laurie cried: "I told you there were some who believed, Eric Taine. I told you!" They reached the control room door, battered at it. Half a dozen men came up with a great post of metal, heaved. The door shuddered. Again. Again. It crashed iii Lindquist and Lafkih stood there, over a great pile of charts and books. "You won't take this ship on to Centauri," Larkin yelled, A little flame flickered at the end of the tube in his hand. He crouched, "If those are the astrogation charts -- " said Striker. Eric dove, caught Larkin's midsection with his shoulder, threw the man back. They struggled on the floor, and dimly Eric was aware of others who held the writhing Lindquist. Larkin fought like a snake,  twisting, turning, gouging. Eric, out of the corner of his eye, saw Lindquist breaking loose, watched him running with the brand to the pile of charts. A shot crashed through the room, echoing hollowly. Lindquist fell over his charts. Now Eric had Larkin down, was pinning him, felt the man's hands twisting, clawing at his stomach, saw them come away with his gun. They grappled, and Eric cursed himself for forgetting the gun, Larkin held it, laughed, squeezed the trigger as Eric pushed clear. Then the laughter faded as Larkin stared stupidly at the gun he had not known how to use. Larkin gasped once, held both hands to the growing red stain on his middle. later. "They're both dead. You know, I think it's better this way. They w'ould have been trouble. But now -- now all we have to do is find the course again, turn the ship around -- " "It'll mean two extra generations in space," Chambers said. "They've been heading back for Earth twenty-five years." With Eric, he studied the charts, assembled them, punched a few buttons on the computing machine. "Like this," Eric said. He twirled a few dials. "It takes a long time with the overdrive, but we'll be back on course in three years." For a while he gazed out the port, fascinated by the huge sweep of the Milky Way, clear and beautiful in the black sky. When he turned back and away from it, Laurie stood beside him. "Hello, Lazarus." "Very funny," he said. "Call me Taine -- better still, call me Eric." "Eric, then. Hello, Eric." He grinned. "I guess you're not psychotic, after all." "Nope. Normal as can be. But take my great great grandmother, now. She was really neurotic. She married, all right, but they say she really carried a torch all her life." There was laughter in the girl's eyes as she spoke. Eric had seen other eyes like that. So familiar. So beautiful. "I am Laurie Simmons," the girl told him. "My great great grandfather's name was Lou Simmons. His wife was Clair. My mother has a book of hers, of poems she wrote to Eric." "Tell me about them, Laurie." A lovely girl; as pretty as her great great grandmother. No -- prettier -- and part pf today. "Never mind, Laurie. Just tell me about yourself." He knew Clair would like it this way. They wanted a world without war. The answer was simple : Stay in bed. Dreamery's World By Bryce Walton somewhere down in the audoviso. Greg stred. Perspiration crawled down his face. This was it. This was the end of the nightmare. This had to be Pat Nichols. After seventytwo hours in which Greg had had to do without anesthesia! Seventy-two hours of reality ! Seventy-two hours of consciousness Consciousness. Reality. Greg didn't know hpw he'd managed to remain sane. It seemed incredible that a man who had advanced to Stage Five in the Dream Continuity Scale, and who had been in anesthesia most of the time, could suffer ' seventy-two hours of boring, drab, dreary and revolting reality. And still be sane. Pat Nichols was the answer. Her body faded into slim and luscious focus on the three-dim screen. Her brooding eyes and wide mouth that curled so reprovingly. She had gone psycho. Had fled from the Cowl into the dreadful Outside, seventy-two hours ago. Gone to join that fanatical group of Venusian Colonists, those outlaw schizoids who planned to start over  on Venus. "Pat!" Greg's hand reached as though she weren't just a three-dim image. "Listen, Pat! Thank the Codes, you haven't blasted yet. I'vebeen crazy, waiting for this call. Pat, I can't even go into integrated anesthesia without you around. My dreams don't seem to focus right." "That's too bad, Greg," she said. He moistened his lips slowly. He slid his hand toward the warning button beneath the table. Her eyes  didn't notice, never left his face. Accusative, sad eyCs. He felt sick. He pushed the button; Now! Now Drakeson up on the apartment roof would trace the point of her call. He'd chart her location with the rhodium tracker niy: Thi beams. Then the two of them would go and pick Pat up and prevent that insane, suicidal, one-way trip to Venus. She might consider it a very unfair thing, but then she was psycho. She'd be glad of it, after she was brought back, brainprobed, and reconditioned. The thought made Greg even more ill. Brain-probing and re-conditioning involved months of a kind of mental agony that no one could adequately describe. The words were enough to give anesthetic nightmares to any Citizen, But, it was for the good of the Cowls, and of the psychos. Her voice was sad too, like her eyes. 'T was hoping you would join me, Greg. Anyway, I called to tell you that in about five hours, we're blasting. This is gOodby." He said something. Anything. Keep her talking, listening. Give Drakeson a chance to employ the rhodium tracker, and spot her location. A kind of panic got loose ill Greg's brain. "Pat, don't you have any insight at all? Can't you see that this  is advanced psychosis, that -- " She interrupted. "I've tried to explain to you before, Greg. But you've always preferred anesthesia. You loathe reality. But I'm part of reality." Yes. He had drearns. The anesthetic cubicles. Stage Five where a man was master of thalamic introjection, dream imagery. A stage where any part of reality Was supposed to have faded into utter inconsequence. But Pat Nichols had always been a part of his conditioned personality pattern. By taking her out of k, fate had struck him with an unbalance in psyche that disturbed the sole objective of life -- to dream "But that's a suicide trip, Pat, and you'll never have a chance to bd cured of your schizophrenia, even if you do get to Venus -- " Her interruption had weariness in it. "Goodby, Greg. I'm sorry for you. That silly status quo, ancf futile dreaming. It will never let you realize what a fine man you are. You'll decay and die in some futile image. So goodby, Greg. And good dreaming." She was gone from the screen. Maybe from earth, unless he got out there and stopped her before that suicide ship rocketed out from its hidden subterranean blast tube. G reg hurried. He didn't realize he could function so rapidly in the world of physical reality. In seconds he had zipped thin resiliant aerosilk about his body, and was running across the wide plastic mesh roof toward the heliocruiser in which Drakeson was waiting. Greg felt the physical power flow as he ran. It sickened him. The conditioners kept the body in good shape, but only to allow the cortical-thalamic imagery faculties to function better. Actual physical business like this was revolting to any Cowl citizen. Any sort of physical and materialistic activity, divorced from anesthesia, might be a sign of enroaching psychosis. That was the fear. That fear of psychosis that might lead to vklence. To change. The Cowls over the Cities protected them from any physical interference with an absolutely stabile, unchanging and static culture. But the Cowls hadn't been able to protect the Citizenry from insanity. During the past year, psychosis had been striking increasingly, without warning, indiscriminate'yGreg dropped down beside the thin ascetic figure at the controls. He grabbed Drakeson's arm. "Did you pick it up, Drake?" "Uh-huh," Drakeson drawled. His mouth was cynical, his gray eyes somber. "Traced it down to a ten meter radius, ,but it's underground. About five miles out of Old Washington, just inside the big radioactivated forest east of the Ruins. About half an hour's flight as the crow might fly. If there was a crow left." "Then let's go. Lift this gadget out of here!" A spot of nausea bounced into Greg's stomach at Drakeson's reference to what the big Chain blowup had done to almost all high cellular life forms, including crows. Only insects and a few shielded humans had withstood the radiation. Most high complex cellular organisms had paid for their complexity. But thanks to the establishment of the Cowled Cities and the Codes of non-change, non-violence, they wouldn't have to pay again. No chance for social change now that might lead to another such disaster. If they could only trace the cause for this psychosis epidemic -- Greg hadn't , thought about it at all until Pat had started talking peculiarly, then when she had broken up completely and left the Cowl, then it hadhit home, hard. The heliocruiser lifted slowly under Drakeson's awkward guidance. Only the Controllers, the Control Council Guards, could work the gadgetry of the City with practiced ease. Everybody else, naturally, was conditioned to various anesthesia states, and had no reason to deal with materialistic things. The cruiser lifted until it was flying directly beneath the opaque stuff of the Cowl, lost in the dazzling rainbows of sunlight shattering through. Drakeson said. "We'll keep up here. Maybe the Controllers won't see us." "What?" A peculiar coolness slid along Greg's spine. "Maybe they won't see us," repeated Drakeson, and then he smiled wryly. "Listen, Greg, You're way ahead of me in the Dream Continuity. You're a lot further away from reality than I am. More impractical. So listen to a word or two before we try to break through the Cowl. "We've never been Outside, don't forget that. It's dangerous. You haven't considered any of the angles. For example, I picked up a couple of shielding suits which you hadn't thought of. And two small wrist Geigers. If I hadn't thought of them, then we'd probably have been contaminated with hard radiation out there, and would have been thrown into the septic pools for about six months." Greg shivered. That would have been very bad. "It's deadly out there; poisonous. Greg. Only the insane have wanted to go Outside for the last few years, and only the Controllers have been out and then only to try to track down the hiding places of the Colonists. You hadn't considered that, but I did. So I had to steal a cOuple of heat-blasters  from the Museum..." "You what?" Greg stared at the two deadly coiled weapons Drakeson dragged from beneath the seat. "Do the Controllers know?" "They've probably found out by now, or will very soon," Drakeson looked grim. "They'll be after us with sky-cars and para-guns. Andthey're sure to slap a psycho label on lis. They would anyway, probably, for just going Outside. But having destructive forbidden weapons on us, they're sure to, and we couldn't go Outside without weapons, Greg." That was right, Greg knew. Paralysis guns wouldn't have been enough out there. Drakeson said softly : "Is she worth it, Greg? We may have to be brain-probed. Is she worth that kind of pain?" G reg'S stomach seemed to tie up in knots. Brain-probing, psychometry. Greg whispered hoarsely. "She's worth it, Drake. And besides, it's ridiculous to think that we'll be suspected. I'm only interested in preventing Pat from making that suicide trip. The Controllers have the same interest." "But that's their job. You and I aren't supposed to be concerned with reality. They've gotten very sensitive this last year. They can't take any chances. At the least sign of disintegration, they have to apprehend and send you to psychometry." Greg said. "You trying to get out of your bargain, Drake? If you don't want that carton of Stage Five dream capsules, then -- " "Oh no, I'll take a chance to get that carton. I never thought I'd get a chance to experience such prematmre dreams. It's worth the gamble, we might get away without being probed." Greg's head ached. Reality always gave him a headache. He wasn't used to it. A man who had reached Stage Five had been an anesthesiac too long to find reality comfortable. "I know the Codes," Greg whispered. "Legally, there's no reason to be apprehended just for leaving the Cowl. And as for the blasters, well -- we can drop them off, hide them, if the Controllers get after us." The cruiser  moved down the sloping arc of tlie Cowl toward the dark patch that Greg recognized as a merging chamber. The plastic spires of the City reached up around them as though reaching for the sun. Only a few human figures could be seen far below, on roofs, and in the streets. A few low stage humans not in anesthesia. Greg crawled into the shielding suit. He took over the unfamiliar controls while Drakeson got his own shielding suit on. They weren't heavy, but were sluggish material that could throw off ordinary radiation. Behind him Greg heard Drakeson's harsh yell. "Sky-cars! Ten of them! Shooting up out of the Control Tower and coming right toward usl Merge, and merge fast, Greg, if you still want to go Outside." Inside the thick sheeting of the suit, Greg's skin was soaked with perspiration. His face, was strained as he moved the cruiser into the first lock chamber. The cruiser had to move through a series of locks to the Outside. A precaution to keep bacteria, radiation, other inimical elements from coming in while an exit from the Cowl was being made. One by one the locks opened and closed as grav-hooks pulled the cruiser through. It was a precariously balanced culture, this one inside the Cowls, Greg thought. Like living inside a gigantic sealed testtube. Any slightly alien elements introduced into that test-tube could make it a place of sealed death in a short time. A rigidly controlled, non-changing environment. That was fine, except that some humans within it had a habit of changing, ancfor the worse. Retrogression, psychosis. Psychometry was trying franticaL ly to find the cause. It seemed obvious that the Venusian Colonists might be causing psychotics to appear in order to swell their ranks of volunteers to go to Venus to start a "new dynamic, progressive order." Madness. Suicide. Progressive evolutionary philosophies meant change, and change might lead anywhere. But eventually it could only lead to another horrible Chain, One Chain had been enough. The earth had been thoroughly wrecked. The few survivors had set up the anti-reality standards, the Cowls and the Codes -- and the Controllers. They established the Dream Continuity that led to the various anesthetic stages. But people went insane. They disagreed. They fled the Cowls. Venusian Colonial Enterprises resulted. It was organized insanity. A neatly planned psychosis, with grandiose delusions of justification. They would save humanity ! Madness. Schizophrenia. Venusian Colonization had been organized three years before. At least four known spaceships had been constructed, stocked, and blasted. They changed their subterranean hideouts after each blast. It had just never occurred to Greg that Pat could go psycho and join them. It was even more ridiculous for the Controllers to suspect him of being psycho. He felt a little better as the cruiser broke out beyond the Cowl and into the blazing natural sun of noon. It blinded Greg. Frightened him a little. He'd never seen the sun before, except dimmed by the Cowl. He sent the cruiser climbing rapidly above the weird grotesque terrain. Drakeson jumped into the seat beside him. His face was white. "Open the converter feed valvfes wide, Greg! Clear open! The Control cars aren't stopping at the merger. They're coming on through. They're right behind us." Greg looked back. Ten sky-cars, and within neuro-gun range. He jerked the converter wide open. Acceleration slammed him back hard. He knew now what fear was. In dreams you never suffered it. T he audio in the control panel cracked out. "Dalson! Drakeson! Turn around! Re-enter the Cowl. Return immediately. This is a Control Council order. Do so or we fire with full charge neuro-blasts." Paralysis guns. And full blast. Greg swallowed. They meant business. And without even a formal enquiry! Drakeson said in a whisper. "What are we going to do?" Greg didn't know. How could they think he was psycho? Drakeson licked his lips. "I don't want to go under the brain-probers, Greg. Nobody does. I don't want to be re-conditioned. I want to stay like I am. I'm not psycho. And they'll brain-probe us sure if we don't turn around and go back. And even if we do -- The audio's cold impersonal voice said: "This is the last order. The neuro-guns are ready to fire." Greg's mind ran in mad circles. He tried to think. He felt Drakeson move, and then he saw Drakeson's hand with that infernal injection solution jiggling arbund in a big hypodermic syringe. "I've just given myself another shot, Greg. You'd better have another right now. If we land down there we'll need all the adrenolex we can get." Greg hardly felt the injection as he tried tb think, clarify his situation. I'm not psycho, he thought desperately. I'm doing something a little bit different, but it isn't psychosis. But good integrated citizens would not fight against the orders from Control. All right. He would submit to brain-probing. But he'd get Pat out of that trap she was in first. He might be able to talk her out of it if he could get to her personally, be with her a while. The Controllers certainly couldn't. They'd drive her away into space as soon as she saw them. The solution. A legality. He knew the Codes didn't he? He yelled back at the pursuing sky-cars via the audio: "Don't fire those neuro-guns. This is Greg Dalson speaking. There's a law against any aggressive destructive action on the part of any Citizen." The audio replied. "The neuroguns aren't destructive. Temporary paralysis." Greg said. "This cruiser is at a high altitude and traveling fast. If you paralyze us now, the cruiser will crash. By using the neuro-guns on us, you will be destructive, homicidal." A dead silence greeted this statement. Greg went on. "I'm a Stage Five citizen. Legally, there's no restriction against going outside the Cowl. I'll report your action and attitudes to the Council if you fire those neuro-guns." Drakeson choked something unintelligible. His face was deathly pale. "Clever," he whispered. "But that clinches it. When we do go back, it's psychometry for us, Greg," Finally the audio answered. The voice was not so cold. It had a tinge of emotionalism. It said. "A technicality, but it does prevent us from firing the neuro-guns. However, we feel it our duty to remain with you until you do return to the Cowl. Because of the recent epidemic of psychosis, we find this authorized by the Control Council... Greg savagely flipped off the audio. Drakesbn said. "If they stay on our toil, we'll lead them right to Pat. They'll scare her away before you get a chance to talk with her, and try to prevent her from going on the ship." "I know," Greg said. "I know. We've got to figure something -- " He looked down at the fantastic semi-organic flora below, "How far to go yet, Drake?" "About three minutes." "All right. We'll set the cruiser down here, and walk to where Pat is." Drakeson choked. "That's suicide," he said. "We won't have a chance." G reg didn't have time to be surprised at his own actions. He pulled Drakeson's hands away from the controls. Drakeson was trying to stop him from bringing the cruiser down. Drakeson gasped. "Even with the heat-blasters, we'll never get a hundred meters away from where we land. I figured on landing directly over the place -- " "So will the Controllers" Greg said. He hurled Drakeson back, heard him sprawl on the mesh flooring where he lay, half sobbing. Greg angled the ship down abruptly. "As soon as we land, I'm running for it," he called back. "The Controllers will be down there swarming all over us, and I don't want to lead them to where Pat is." Drakeson crawled oyer to the bunk and sat on it. "All right," he said. "I'm with you. It's too late to get out of it now. For a carton of premature dreams, I've gotten myself stuck with a psycho tag. I'm stuck with it anyway, now. Might as well go on, and stay out of the brain-probers as long as possible." Greg felt a tingling crawl up his wrists as they dropped down above the gigantic, semi-organic forest. Mutated cells in the process of change had played havoc with the preChain life forms. According to what little he had gotten from infotapes, there was no longer any distinction or at least very little, between organic and inorganic life, outside the Cowls. Psycho. He'd still argue with Drakeson about that, but lie didn't have time. He wasn't psycho. As soon as he persuaded Pat to abandon the flight, they'd give themselves up, return to the Cowl, and things would return to normal, to anesthesia, Stage Five, then Six, then Seven, on to the final eternal dream. That's the way it was going to be. And if they had to suffer the hells of brainprobing and the awful ego-loss of re-conditioning, then they would do that too. It was for the good of the Cowls, the preserva tion of the Codes. A noble sacrifice. Must be no change. No menace to stability. Any suggestion of change made ohe suspect; Greg's eyes misted as he brought the cruiser to a halfcrash landing. Even as he tried to bring his blurred vision into focus, he was running to the exit. He had the sliding paneh open. He was up to his knees in writhing tendrils. He was running through a crimson twilight. Behind him, he heard Drakeson tearing through the tendrils, and clutching vines. Overhead he could hear the drone of the sky-car's atomurbinic motors. Whether they would land and continue the search on foot through the deadly forest, Greg couldn't know. , He didn't know anything about the Controllers' methods. "How far, Drake," he yelled through the interperson audio. Drakeson came running up beside Greg. Severed strings of torri, still living life-stuff writhed from his shoulders and legs. 'T'd say about half a mile straight ahead. That's a long way through this nightmare." Greg screamed. A broad mushroom-like growth had opened a mouth. A gigantic, sickeningly gray mouth full of deadly, flesh-eating acid. A flower-bright vine with great tensile strength raked Drakeson in toward that gaping maw. Drakeson' s arms were held tight against his sides. He was straining --  helpless. Through the glassine mask of his helmet, Greg saw Drakeson' s face turning red with constriction. His voice came to Greg in a burst of fear. "The gun, Greg! The heatblaster -- quick -- " Greg leaned forward, staring in rigid fascination. Fleshy stocks swayed toward him. Other mouths opened, petal mouths. Gigantic floral traps, and cannibal blooms. "Greg! Greg!" Drakeson was framed now by that great cannibal maw. Greg had the heat-blaster up. He had it leveled. But he couldn't depress the firing stud. "Drake! I can't! I can't!" How could any integrated man be deliberately destructive? How could any sane person -- kill? "I can't -- Drake -- " The awful conflict seemed to rip through his body. He felt the sweat, hot and profuse, rolling down his face. He concentrated on that gun, on his finger, on the firing stud. The cannibal blossom was closing. Sticky juices dripped over Drakeson. He was screaming. Greg's finger lifted. He could not fire. The Codes said no destruction. established after the great Chain disaster. Violence begets violence, the Codes said. And once begun, it was accumulative, like the snowball rolling down hill. Greg sagged. His knees buckled. He sprawled out in the slippery muck. Tendrils swished softly and hungrily around him. He heard a shout. He tried to twist his head. Figures blurred before his eyes, and he heard the deadly chehoivwwThe last thing he remembered before the dark wrapped him up softly and warmly, was the cannibal ments of stringy tissue, and Drakeson falling free. I didnt fire, he was thinking. Someone else saved Drakeson. But I think I might have done it. My finger -- it was moving -- bending -- or was it? No. I couldn't have been destructive. Couldn't have killed. to Greg. Painfully. It carrie back slowly and it took a long time. He lifted his eyelids. He raised himself to a sitting position. He stared down a gloOmy, phosphorescent corridor. It was obviously subterranean. It was damp, chill. Cold luciferin light glowed from lichen on walls and low ragged ceiling. It was long and it finally curved, he decided. But he could look back into a long slow curve of corridor and ahead into the same. Here and there, the mouths of branch corridors came in. He looked at his hand. It Still clutched the butt of the heatblaster. He felt strange. The surroundings were very real, yet they seemed somehow not real. The shock of trying to fire that blaster when the sanity in him shrieked "No!" had been too much foishim. The shock had blanked him out. He breathed a deep sigh of temporary relief and triumph. He hadn't killed He thought of Drake- son. Somebody had saved him. Someone had Mled. Not the Controllers. They could employ only the neuro-guns to paralyze. So he decided that Colonists had probably saved Drakeson. Terror gripped Greg then He remembered Drakeson yelling at" him, the distended eyes, the straining face. And how he himself had almost given in, had almost killed. Had almost gone psycho. But he hadn't. That was the important thing. He was still a sane, integrated part of the Cowls and the Codes. And after a test like thatj he figured that nothing could break him. Let them send him to psych ome try. Let them clamp on the brain-probers and leave them on for months. They'd not find any psycho tendencies in Greg Dalson. Greg tried to reason. But he had no place, no fodation, for a beginning. He didn't knoV where he  was, cyr why he had been left here. He knew that someone, the Colonists probably, had saved Drakeson from that plant thing. Some mental pressure had blacked him out, he thought, and then what? He didn't know. Which way? It didn't seem to matter. He started walking. He was bone-weary. His head throbbed. His eyes burned. And he Was afraid. He had gotten himself into a completely un-Codified situation. He was lost, helpless, outside the protection of the Cowls, the Codes, and anesthesia. He was surrounded by reality. Reality in all its essential horror. Conflict, Physical danger...Uncertainties. Materialistic barriers. All the old shibboleths that the Cowls and the Codes and the anesthesiac dreams had protected him from. And all because of Pat Nichols. But he'd stood a big test. And he'd won. He hadn't killed. He wasn't destructive. He -- The cry touched his ears and died. It was too violent and filled with pain and terror to 'make any definite impression the first time. He crouched. His eyes distended. The scream came again, and this time it chopped through him. Mis nerves seemed to shrivel and curl beneath the repeated onslaughts of the screams. Then he was running. He didn't know why, except that he had to run. He ran with fearful, gasping desperation. But he didn't know why. H e ran past the mouth opening into the main corridor. Then came back and ran into the darker, strangely-lighted artery. He ran harder. And yet he wasn't running. Not all of him. As he ran, he was conscious of some undefinable, but terrific conflict. Beneath the suit, his skin burned with sweat. He felt the rigid pattern of tensed neck and jaw muscles. I dont feel at all familiar. Some things very wrong. Everything's wrong. Fm displaced, like something that has slipped into an alien dimension. He stopped, quickly. His heart seemed to swell, burst with terror. Terror and something else. The something else came, and with it came horror of itself. The emotion, and then horror of the emotion. He stood shivering, his teeth clacking like an ancient abacus. 'Tat!" He screamed her name. The cry pounded back into his ears inside the helmet. This wasn't DrakescJn. This was Pat. Pat was going to die now. Not Drakeson. The walls were -- alive. They were not like the walls of the corridors. This was a circular chamber, and the walls were sagging and undulating like part of a giant's flesh. He heard heavy sluggish sounds. Masses of the gray viscous stuff sagged, changed form, remolded itself into monstrous shapes. Patl Only her face and part of her upper body were visible now. The shielding of her suit had been cracked wide open by pressure as the semi-organic thing, whatever it was, had closed around her.  The walls rushed in as Greg stumbled drunkenly. The ceiling sagged lower. Long knobs fell, like globules of paste, then lengthened into shapeless tendrils that snapped out at Greg. He fell back. Pat's screarh penetrated again. No beauty remained in her face now. Her eyes were sick. Her lips were loose and trembling. "Greg -- help me -- help me -- see what it does -- the others -- " He saw the others then. Maybe he hadn't noticed before, because his mind didn't want him to see. Husks. Pallid wrinkled husks, sucked dry and shriveled. Several figures not recognizable anymore, hardly recognizable as human. Just vaguely human, broken, sucked dry. His mind seemed covered by a grotesque shadow. His flesh crawled and his throat turned dry, and perspiration made a stream down his throat. He felt his eyes looking down at his right hand. It held the heat-blaster. The skin felt tight as though it would split as he gripped the heavy butt of the coiled weapon. He concentrated on the finger that was frozen on the firing stud. If he could destroy, then he was insane. His experience with Drakeson, that had been no test at all compared with this. This was Pat. Pat, and she was dying -- dying unspeakably. This was the great test of his sanity. He. concentrated on the finger. He must keep it frozen. He must back out of here. Get away, get back to the Cowl, back to anesthesia and sleep. The finger raised slowly from the stud. His feet lifted as his body moved fitfully back, back back -- "Greg-help me, Greg -- Her eyes stopped him. They tumbled into terrible clarity. She whispered starkly. "Greg -- help me -- kill it, Gtegi For me -- Kill it." He felt his lips part in a great and terrible cry of torture. His shoulders began to twitch slightly. His arms and fingers took up the jerky rhythm. Horror and a violent crimson flood of unfamiliar emotions mushroomed like a volcano of madness. Something began crumbling away. He lurched forward. He felt the heat-blaster heaving, throwing out its. deadly load. The gun had weight and power in his hand as he crouched lower and moved in. The power load swathed in long slicing arcs. Steam and sickening stench fell around him. He moved in. He stumbled forward kicking out to right and left at the quivering slices #f stuff that were falling around him. Destruction, Kill. Death. This was all three, and in a giant, almost inconceivable quantity. Her face through the steaming cloud. Her throat moving as she swallowed. Brightness, the brightness of disbelief and irripossibility coming into her eyes. He kept moving in until the monstrous mutated gray thing was thoroughly dead. Until every separate tendril and patch was blasted to smoke. Then he lifted her broken body in his arms. Tears fell on the opaqueness of his helmet. "I'm sorry, Pat' he choked. "I'm sorry it didn't happen sooner. I'm sorry I waited too long -- but it isn't easy -- to let yourself go insane." Something was wrong.' Pat! Pat! She seemed to be fading away from him, drifting away, melting into tattered veils of cloud. Her face became only two bright glad eyes, then they also melted together into a radiant pool. He toppled into the pool. He sank down, a wonderful lifelessness spreading through him. He closed his eyes. Something was beginning to be very funny. In the thickening dark, he laughed a little. And in that laugh was a crazy, climbing note of -- triumph. H e opened his eyes. He Was laughing, in a kind of soft hysteria. He was on a couch. Not a a dream couch, but just a plain hard bed. He sat up stiffly. Pain tingled down his legs. He saw Pat Nichols. And another. A man. He remembered him vaguely, one of the first who had escaped from the Cowl. His name -- yes -- he remembered now, MerroL Pat Nichols, alive, and smiling. Very beautiful too in a brief aerosilk bra and shorts and sandals. Her hair was a dark lovely cloud flowing down over bare shoulders. "Hello, Greg," she said softly. "Welcome to -- the Colonists." "What?" He swung his legs around. "I don't understand. Not entirely." Merrol a gaunt elderly man nodded from behind a desk. Merrol's hair was gray and sparse. Strange, seeing a man who showed age. Within the Cowls, one never grew physically old, Pat said, "This is Ralph Merrol, Personnel Director of Venusian Colonization Enterprises." Greg's numbness was filtering away beneath Pat's warm glad eyes. He raised his hand. The heatblaster was still gripped in his fingers. It evidently hadn't been fired. "It was all illusion," he said. "The scene in the cavern. It never happened?" Merrol's care-lined face nodded. "It happened, but in your mind, Greg. We rescued you and Drakeson from the cannibal plant. We brought you here. You had lost consciousness. We put you under the hypnosene rays, and put you through an experience that was quite real to you. We proved something to ourselves, and to you. Greg -- you're sane now." Greg tried to understand. The thing didn't make sense yet, but the glimmerings of the truth were beginning to solidify in his aching brain. "Sane? But I killed. I wanted to kill. I wanted to destroy, and I did. That's hardly the actions of a -- sane man." Merrol smiled thinly. "Fromour point of view it is, Greg. We consider ourselves sane. We consider the Cowled Cities, and the Codes insane. It's relative I supposed, but I think we can convince you, if we haven't already." Greg looked at Pat. She smiled. He smiled back. "Justified or not," he whispered. "I'm here. Sane or insane, I'm one of the Colonists now I guess. Unless I want to return to the Cowls, be probed and te-conditioned." Pat whispered. "Do you, Greg?" He shook his head. "Not now. Tm tired. I don't want to now. Maybe I never will. All I want now, is rest." Merrol leaned across the desk. "Before you rest, you'd better get a few things straight, Greg. We want you to be convinced that you're doing the right thing. We feel that the big Chain blowup shocked the whole human race into a mass psychosis, comparable to individual cases of hysteria, schizophrenia, escape from reality. That's why the non-change, non-aggressiveness Codes were established. Also, the anesthesia, the Dream Continuity Scale -- nothing but hysteria on a mass and planned basis," Merrol got up. He walked around and sat down beside Greg. "Carried out to its inevitable end, this could only lead to mass racial suicide. That's obvious. It was a static dead end. A few people recovered from the psychosis. They escaped, and formed the Colonists. But their own welfare wasn't the most important thing. "They concerned themselves then with the freeing of the Citizens of the Cowls from their psychosis. The world is untenable on a large scale now, due to radioactive poisoning. It will remain untenable for some time. Meanwhile we decided to Colonize Venus. We' ve established Colonies there. Thriving communities, but the important thing is thk Greg -- it's given new impetus and enthusiasm to those who become sane and escape the Cowls. It presents a big challenge and solidifies the cure. ' 'Tt's bigger than Control has any idea that it is. It will take a long time yet, but we'll win. You have noticed the increase in so-called insanity in the Cowls. It really means just the opposite. Our numbers are increasing by leaps and bounds.' Greg said. "The Controllers think you're using some psychological or physical pressure to create these -- Cures." Merrol smiled. "We've got a recruiting system, Drakeson, for example, is a spy. We have spies all over the Cowls." Greg stared. "Drakeson?" A door opened. The lean cynical tnan entered, nodded, and stood beside Pat. His eyes shone more brightly as he looked at Greg. "That's right," Drakeson said. "Remember the two injections. I said they were adrenolex. They weren't. Our spies inside the Cowls are equipped with a supply of a certain aggression factor. It used to be called Kappa, or K, for killer. This factor is handed down through the generations in the general cell protoplasm. It forces aggressive tendencies. It makes a man capable of physical aggressive action, and able to kill, if he has to. High motivation is required though, in most cases. With you, my probable death wasn't enough. It took the vision of Pat here in the dutches of a monster to make the Kappa factor work on yoti, Greg." Greg rubbed his eyes. Pat came over and he took her hand, held it tightly. A svatinth came out of her and into him, into his mind. D rakeson went on. 'We isolated the Kappa factor, made it into solution. We all have it, even the anesthetic citizens of the Cowls, but the mass shock psychosis won't let it work. However, a Strong over load of Kappa injection will sometimes break the psychosis, force the; person back into an aggressive personality, capable of destruction. Each individual carries an armament of between # and # particles of the Kappa factor after we give an injection. It took # parr tides to break your suicidal hysteria." Pat squeezed his hand. Greg looked up. He grinned with a kind of glad embarrassment. "I don't know yet whether to thank you or not. Frankly though, I do feel better." He thought of the Cowls. Testttibes, glass cages, and dreams that led finally to the final anesthesia, death. He shuddered, and tried tb push the memory out of his mind. It seemed unhealthy now. Uncleah and -- yes, it did seem insane He raised his eyes to the ceiling. He saw the self-inverting three dimensional mechanism that had given him that starkly real adventure in which he had been able to kill, for Pat. A dream sequence, partly hypnotic, partly created by cathode image activating the multiphase AC. A high harmonic of multi-phase AG field hanging over him, and a focusing radiator. Dream. Nightmare. He looked at Pat. "I think I'D take reality now," he said softly. He felt the pull on his arm, and he got up. She led him through a door and into a soft twilight. He held her tightly against him. She whispered. "The ship's waiting for us, Greg. The next ship. You're already on the passenger list. You see, I knew you'd come with us. I was hoping so desperately, J couldn't think any differently." He kissed her. He held her more tightly as though -- as though -- He felt her warm muscles tense against him. Her eyes widened. "Greg! What is it?" He shook his head. "I -- I got to wondering if this too, might not be just a dream. I've been in anesthesia too long maybe. How can I know what's real and what isn't real?" He felt her warm moist fingers on the back of his neck. He felt her lift on her toes, pull his face down. She kissed him. Her voice was husky, and her breath was warm on his lips. "Do you know now, Greg? Is this a dream?" He shook his head. His voice was hoarse. "No -- no -- this isn't a dream." She laughed softly. They moved away, down the corpidor toward the ship. His story reads like fantasy -- yet Science has never disproved it! A t the age of ten he caused his bowl of oatmeal to skip about the breakfast table, and furniture to be lifted by unseen hands. At thirteen he was prophesying events, even death, with alarming accuracy. At twentyfive he was holding spellbound men -- scholars, emperors, scientists, critics -- whose names ring in the pages of history! Daniel Home was probably the greatest medium the modern world has ever known. His feats were more than amazing -- they were supernatural. Witnesses could hardly believe their eyes, yet they had to -- for no one could ever refute him! ing story of this great American-reared medium in the May issue of -- On sale at all newsstands -- # cents The Reamer mansion was on trial. It announced its own verdict -- guilty! Pattern By Alvin Heiner H e WAS a man easily smiled at; a little birdlike individual carrying an umbrella and wearing upon his pink face a look remindful of happy secrets about to be revealed. He canae to my desk during the midafternoon lull and said, "I am Professor Jonathan Waits. I have come to avail myself of your facilities." I had never heard it put quite that way before, but from Professor Waits, it did not sound stilted. It was the way you would expect him to put it. He beamed at the ceiling and said, "What # fine old library, my dear. I must bring Nicholas Some time." I gave him the smile reserved financial supporters and unknown quanta tivcs and asked, "Could I be of service?" He didn't get to it immediately, understand this library is fairly crammed with old recordsdata on the historical aspects of this area. Personal histories and such." He had a way of radiating his own cheerful mood. "Oh yes," I assured him. "It's an exceptional day when we don't sweep a D.A.R. or two out of the aisles come closing time." This, according to his laugh, wai quite good. He said, "I'm sure we'll get on splendidly, Miss -- ?" Hopstead."  "Are you a native?" "A New Englander from way back," I assured him. "Some of my ancestors used to drink buttered rum with Captain Rogers." "Then possibly you'd Ukq to know about my work." "I certainly would." And, strangely enough, I did. "I am a researcher into the -- well, the unusu." "Psychic research?" I inquired, wanting him to know we New Englanders were not dullards. "No. Nothing to do with the supernatural at all. My work is to prove that all occurrences, however mysterious, are the logical result of previous actions of individuals ; that superstitions are the result, not so much of ignorance, but lack of knowledge." While I wrestled with that one, he said, "Maybe I could be a trifle more explicit." "That would help." His bright little eyes got even brighter. "Do you know, by chance, of the Reamer mansion over in Carleton?" I certainly did. It was some thirty miles from Patterson, but as a child, Pd visited the place. All children within the radius had visited the Reamer mansion at least once. It was an ancient fifteen room cockroach trap with such a history of death and violence behind it as to cause the kids to walk on tiptoe through its silent rooms. I told the professor I knew about it. "It has been vacant for fifteen years," he observed. "And will be vacant for twice fifteen more, T imagine." "That's just the point. Superstition. Otherwise solid and sane people wouldn't dream of moving into the Reamer mansion. And it's so silly." "It is?" "Of course. And that's why I'm here. I intend to prove, so the most stubborn will understand, that the house itself has nothing whatsoever to do with its own grim past ; that the people who lived in it are to blame." It was a dull day and he was such an apparently sincere little man that I decided to keep the conversation alive. "Fm afraid you'll have, a hard time proving it. Let's see -- the first one was old Silas Reamer. He committed suicide there. That was sometime . around #. Then -- " " -- His son, Heriry Reamer, was found dead under mysterious circumstances two years later. Murder was obvious, but nothing has ever been done about it." I frowned in mock severity. "I don't like the way you put that, Professor. Do you imply that we New Englanders condone violence?" "Oh, not at all. There were just -- no clues, from what I've learned. The next unfortunate, a renter named Miles McCormick, was found dead along with his wife and child as a result of lethal gas from a faulty stove." "That happened the year I was born. We have the old newspapers here, telling about it." "Those reports, along with other material are what I wish to study," Professor Waits said, then went on. "The house stood vacant for five years, until a Johnathan Hays bought it." "But Johnathan Hays never moved in. He died of a heart attack while carrying a chair through the front door." He beamed on me. "You are a remarkably alert young woman; well up in local history." "With no credit to me. You'd be hard put finding a citizen around here who doesn't know the history of the Reamer mansion." "Not 'of tlje Reamer mansion', my dear. Of the people who just happened to reap their ill-fortune there' "You insist the house had noth ing to do with it?" "Nothing whatever." I you know how big a bite you've taken? If you go up in the hills hereabouts you'll find whole families living in dirt-floor houses You'll find children who never heard of a bath or a telephone. But you won't find one person who would live in the Reamer mansion for a salary paid promptly every Saturday morning." "Nonetheless," Professor Waits replied, "the so-called jinx of the mansion, or any other maligned locality, is a matter of monstrous coincidence. The truth lies hidden in the lives of the people involved. I've been ferreting out that truth." "You mean this isn't a beginning, Professor?" He grasped his umbrella in a manner indicating he meant to spear a dragon in case there were any around, and said, "Oh my no! I've been tracing the lives of the principals in this drama for some time. It involves long, tedious work I must not only dig into the lives of the unfortunates themselves, but also into those of kin; everi -- in some cases -- friends." "What did you find out about the murder?" He evaded neatly, "I am not seeking a killer as such. Relative to that facet of the case, I am more interested in Henry Reamer himself. A very wise man once said, 'If you would understand violence, look also intothe heart of the murdered'. A man carries the seeds of his destiny in his own soul," "And you intend to prove it?" "I am finding more proof every day. Soon I shall publish a paper which will startle the thinking world," I could see the Professor wasn't one to be backed into any corners "And how can I help in this Work?" "I am tracing at the moment, certain details in the life of Mabel Tut worthy, an aunt of Silas Ream- er. Upauthenticated legends indicate she killed an eight-point buck once, with her bare hands, and dragged it home across ten miles of forest." "I've heard that, and it's probably true. You think it has something to do with what happened to Silas?" " -- And his son Henry." "I think you'll find what you want in that section by the south window. It's devoted to local history." "Thank you, my dear." He moved away, reminding tne somehow, of a happy retriever going into a lake after a duck. Halfway to the shelves, he halted suddenly and turned. "Did you know that seventy percent of the accidents happen to twenty percent of the people?" I didn't, but I refused to admit such backwardness. "I certainly do. Amazing, isn't it?" "That is one of the pillars upon which my work is based." "And there are others?" "Seven in all." He didn't tell me what the other six were. Instead he disappeared into local history and left me with the latest best seller I was reading under the counter lest some child come in and be stripped of all innocence by one glance. It was two hours before Professor Waits reappeared. He carried a small blue notebook in one hand and a stub pencil in the other. He was positively beaming. "A gold mine," he said. "A veritable gold mine. Did you know that Ezekial worthy was gored by a bull in the year #?" "No -- reallyT" Then I was truly ashamed of myself. He was such a pleasant, sincere little man and he got such fun out of life. But he misinterpreted my boorishness for true enthusiasm and said. "It's a fact! Imagine! Walking in here and finding one of the links I've hunted for months. I'm indebted to you, my dear, for directing me to that book shelf." I could have told him he was under no obligation; that I got, each week, the coolie stipend of twenty eight dollars for doing just that; but I didn't want him starting an investigation into peonage system practiced in libraries and schools. Then something in the little man's manner, sobered me. "Professor -- exactly why are  you doing this?" He blinked. "I have plenty of money. I have the time. It interests me. And I feel it a worthy occupation; gathering knowledge through which people may know the true causes of misfortune ; may throw off the yoke of superstition." "You feel, then, that nothing happens by chance?" "My dear," he said' solemnly, "in this ordered universe there can be no such thing. Action and achievement-cause and result. The revealing pattern of each man's actions is in the pasts of himself and his antecedents." "And by proving this you will exonerate the Reamer mansion of all guilt?" He smiled. "You are a most intelligent young lady. Most intelligent! I shall see a great deal of you in the weeks to come." pect. I liked the Professor and was glad he liked me. After he left I went back and found not a single book out of place. I Hked him even more. Two weeks passed before I saw Professor Waits again. He came in out of the sunshine, carrying his black umbrella and wearing the same black string necktie. I was busy at the time, finding an acceptable book for Mrs. Winsolow's little Freddie who was in bed with the pip. When I got clear, Professor Waits was deep in his research and I did not disturb him. He came pattering out just before closing time and I was struck by the somber -- almost sad -- expression he wore. "Did you have trouble finding what you wanted, Professor?" "Oh no. The records are most voluminous. It's just -- well, the nature of my discoveries." "Bad?'Y "Very bad Miss Hopstead. Do you know who Henry Reatnet's murderer was?' "No." "Miles McCormick, the renter who died there so tragically with his family." I didn't quite know how to respond; whether I should faint or scream for the police. I settled for a philosophical comment. "A case of justice by a higher power." "You mean McCormick's death?" "Of course." "On the contrary. There was no Gonnectioii at all between the two events. McCormick and his wife and child died because they violated a certain law, but not necessarily a law on the statute books." "I'm afraid I don't quite follow that." "Look at it this way, Miss Hopstead. You are walking through a dark room. A door is standing open. You come into violent contact with the edge of it. What happens?" "A broken nose? A black eye." "Precisely. The fact you didn't know the door was there didn't protect you from the consequences." This of course, I was forced to concede. "Now let's go a step further by taking, as example, a lower mentality than our own. A horse, knowing nothing of the laws of electricity, would step on a high Voltage wire and never know why it Was electrocuted. In such  case, the animal would violate a law it did not know existed." I was beginning to see what h# was driving at. "You mean -- " "We are far above the horse in mentality and understanding but there are still many laws we do not understand. That is what my work involves." I insisted upon being heard. "You mean a lot of apparently im nocent things we do are really electric wires." He beamed. "Exactly. When we reap misfortune it is because we violate some law. Ignorance of that law doesn't change the end-result one iota." 'And you're trying to find oUt what these -- these booby traps are?" "Oh I know many of them already. My paper will surprise the world. I'm working on a more advanced phase of the problem now. I am tracing a pattern of interlocks ing violations to show that the scene of the end-results can be only sheerest coincidence. I want to banish once and for all the superstitionstigma attached to scenes of repeated misfortune and violence." "The Reamer mansion." "That's right. And now I must be going, Miss Hopstead." He gave me the departing smile and started for the door. "Professor Waits." "Yes?" "About Mabel Tutworthy. Did she really drag that buck ten miles." "No. It was only a fawn. And she killed it less than a mile from her cabin" "And the murder of Henry Reamer. What proof -- ?" "Nothing the police would be interested in. It was the end-result of a cause they won't understand until my work is published and given studyi" He opened the door, looked around, smiled. "This is ceiJtainly a fine old building. I must bring Nicholas with me the next time.' With that, he 'was gone. to his next visit. I looked and looked and a month passed and a tall, serious-faced youth came into the library and waited until Fd finisheci checking in Mrs. Garvey's returns. 'T understand," he said, "that fon have an immense store of local history in this library?" "The section by the south window." "Thank you." He peered at me through thick lenses. "Thank you Miss -- " Hopstead." "Miss Hopstead. I am Nicholas Worthy. Possibly you knew a friend of mine. Professor Waits? I am carrying on 'his work." "Carrying on -- ? Did something happen to -- ?" "Oh. Then you didn't hear. It was most tragic. Professor Waits died of pneumonia. A great loss -- a great loss." I was deeply shocked. My feeling was that of losing a close friend. "No, I hadn't heard. It must have been very sudden." "It was. He was advanced in years, you know, and after he fell, pneumonia set in quickly. They were unable to save him." "The Professor had an accident?" , "Yes. He fell down the main staircase of the Reamer mansion and broke his hip." Latch on to the next if! pened to science-fiction in the last year is a young man named Walter Miller Jr. -- the lad who writes "with ability lies in the fact that his stories are becoming harder and harder to acquire. But IF was luclty ! in the July issue of IF, by Walter Miller Jr., on sale May #th. John W. Campbell Jr. Because there is no distinguishing mark save their own accomplishments, no presentlyaccepted basis of "race" distinction makes any important sense whatsoever. Homo superior is here -- but only by his works can you find him. Confucius, Einstein, George Washington, Moses, Plato, Christophe, the Black Napoleon, and Abraham Lincoln all belonged to one race, the race of Imperial Man -- homo superior. And each was a mongrel hybrid -- even as you and I! H. L. Gold Good Lord the worid today is loaded with ifs ! So crammed, crowded, bulging with ifs jostling each other, in fact, that it's a pure, bafflement to see writers turning the same ones over and over, looking for some new bump never before noticed on the use-worn surfaces. Howard Browne Mary and Joe Dokes get so fed up with fact they want a few hours of escape. So they do what men and women have done for centuries. They sneak off into the fairy world of romance, adventure, action... The world of dreams. A priceless world given us by a kindly Creator Who knew the going would get tough at times; Who knew there would be cold dreary facts to burn on this tired old planet and that we would need moments of blessed escape. Samuel Mines Writers of fiction have ah ways . had stern competition from life, which has a way of being startling, fantastic and wonderful on its own. When World War II actually got under way, after the sitzkrieg, the speculations of writers wer completely eclipsed by the stunning drama of events which outclassed all imaginings. Many a writer at that point was heard to remark that there was no Sense in making up drama, for it simply could not compete with the newspaper headlines, Lila Shaffer Thou shalt love all thy neighbors throughout the land and entertain them well, lest they stop buying thy magazine, thus making for long, hungry days. I the I I I Dear Mr. Fairman: The March issue of IF was tops. I saw the gal with the tiger looking at me from the mag rack and I said to myself: "Huh! What's this? IF? No know." on the cover. Rog is one of my favorites. I've read his "So Shall Ye Reap" four times. So I took a copy of IF home and sure 'noughl Rog's "Old Martians" was the best story. He got a mood into it that actually scared me, as if one of the Old Martians was looking over my shoulder. Look out, Rog. They might get you for showing them up. The rest of the ish rates thusly in my book. Two: "Twelve Times Zero." It got better as it went along. Think maybe it should have been longer. Three: "Black Eyes And The Daily Grind." I got a laugh out of Black Eyes. And the illo was good. Four: I guess it has to go to "Never Underestimate." It's real Sturgeon but maybe a weensy bit too slick. Five: The rest of the ish. By the way -- why no illo credits except on the cover? The artists work hard too. All in all a fine ish with a terrific cover. But how come no fanzine revues? -- John Coleman It seems to us, John, that fanzines are pretty well covered by other magazines in the field. So we de cided to use the space for features not found elsewhere. If enough fans tell us weWe wrong, well change our policy.   #  Dear Ed : Something new! A science fiction magazine with intelligent articles. The one on Bob Tucker and his news letter was tops. Enjoyed it even more than the excellent stories. Notice you're writing up Palmer and the Shaver Mystery in your next issue. Will be watching for it. Also, congratulations to Howard Browne on his "Twelve Times Zero." He did something rarely done in science fiction -- made it sound convincing. I caught myself almost believing it, -- Milo Spence   Dear Ed: Picked up a copy of your magazine on the stand and figured it was new because I hadn't seen it before. And I thought to myself, maybe this one's got something new in the way of writers. But no. There they were on the cover. The same old hacks who turn out ninety percent of today's science fiction. Why don't you get smart and come up with some brand new names? Some writers with a fresh slant on? Science fiction is waiting for a magazine like that but it looks like you have missed the boat. This is meant as honest criticism and I hope you will print it but I'll bet you won't -- Janet Steiner Arent you being a little harsh, Janet. The writers in the March issue of IF are on the top of a highly competetive field. They stay there because they are able to produce good fiction. If better stories are submitted to IF or any contemporary magazine by new names those stories are bought. The fact that are in print again and again proves they do a better job than other writers new or old. We read every script submitted and we like new writers. We hope ' to buy many firsP' stories  Dear Mr. Fairman: Hooray for IF -- it's terrif; Maybe you'd like to use that as a slogan If SO # send me a buck. Seriously, your magazine hit the stands with a bang. There were eight copies on the rack when I got there. I bought One. That night I met a friend of mine and sent her down to get one. She said there weren't any left so I'm going to give her mine. Theodore Sturgeon's story is one of the cutest I ever read, imagine if that really happened (blush blush). I haven't read the covet story by Howard Browne yet. I'm writing first so as to get in line to win an original manuscript. Yummy! And keep IF coming! -- Nora Parsons We certainly will keep IF coming, Nora. And we hope you win one of the manuscripts. Let us know what you think of Twelve Times Zero.    Dear Ed: How come no artist's names except the cover? Who ever heard of a science fiction book, or any other fiction book, without the names of the artists? -- Paul Liebowitz    Dear Ed: "Of Stegner's Folly" was great -- just like the old days. Hang onto Shaver and you're in. For my money, anyhow. -- Art Wister    ThaPs all the letters we have room for this trip. Well arrange for more space in the future. Incident ally, the winners of our manuscript contest will be announced in July issue -- on the stands May #th. Better have your news dealers reserve a copy. your news dealer for this big-value magazine of puzzles! Over # scintillating new word puzzles to test your skill! Crosswords, Askews, Skeletons, Word Chains, Slidograms, Cryptograms, Diagramless, Crostics, Round-and-Round, Movie Puzzles, Radio Puzzles, Television Puzzles -- hours and hours of fun and thought-provoking "entertainment for all puzzle whenever you are looking for puzzle pleasure!... At all newsstands -- ony # cents! magazine really UfUAwos this #I nu man?... At the age of three his cradle moved in a queer manner. At ten he caused his oatmeal bowl to skip about the table and furniture to be lifted by unseen hands. At thirteen he was prophesying events with alarming accuracy. At twenty-five he astounded the world with his supernaturol powers... Reod about this amazing person In The Fabulous Circles of Nine in the May issue all newsstands -- # cents.  l # I a(l JH B  VB l i  #I All Stories New and Complete Publisher Editor IF is published bi-monthly by, Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., # Lord St., Buffalo, N. Y. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., Kingston, N. Y. Application for Entry as Second Class matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York, pending. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction. Any similirity to actual persons is coincidental. #c a copy. Printed in U.S. A. I    Marion Fried R.F.D. #I Monmouth Junction New Jersey. Dear Marion:  In the letter you wrote congratulating us on the first issue of IF, you asked a question which -- strangely enough -- was not found in any other of the hundreds we received. I gathered from your letter that you are sixteen years old -- that you like science fiction but are having a tough time because your brother doesn't think much of it and most of your classmates are partial to the "true confession" type of magazine. Possibly it will comfort you to know that I am pretty much in the same boat. My two small daughters are partial to Hopalong Cassidy, and their mother will read a science fiction story if you hold a pistol to her head. But to your question: In the straightforward manner of the typical sixteen-year-old, you ask: "Can you give me a gooddefinition of science fiction in one sentence?" can't. As a matter of cold fact, I don't know what a science fiction story is. This, no doubt, must be considered an admission of guilt, coming as it does from the editor of a science fiction magazine. But I, too, can find comfort in the conviction that I am not alone. I don't think any of the other stf editors can define science fiction either. Of course I could give you any number of one-sentence definitions. I could say that a science fiction story is one in which the characters are occupied with scientific gimmicks. That wouldn't be a true definition, however, because -- while it may define one type of story -- it does not define the field. Y OU see the trouble is -- science fiction is not a basic fiction pattern. Strictly speaking, there are few of these basic patterns, and they were discovered and set down long before science fiction was developed. The love story, for instance, is basic, mainly because it deals with a basic human emotion and is therefore fixed in its disciplinary structure. The detective story, which is hardly differentiated from the mystery pattern, is also basic, because we are dealing there, with a basic human characteristic -- curiosity; the love of solving a puzzle. But the western story -- as an instance -- is not really basic. It is merely a background against which love, mystery, humor, or some other basic pattern, is laid. The same is true with adventure stories, the term usually indicative of an exotic or unusual background against which a love story, a mystery story, or a problem story, is laid. As a matter of fact, even the basics can be mixed up. All detective stories -- or ninety percent of them -- carry a love interest. And all love stories carry a mystery' thread, even if it's only the reader's curiosity as to what's going to happen next. So about all that can be really defined, is a story. They've discovered that in order to achieve the desired effect, a story must contain certain things. There should be both sympathetic and unsympathetic characters. The sympathetic character should be faced with a problem. He or she should solve that problem through individual effort and in a manner which satisfies and entertains the reader. a story. Of course there are a world of variations, but they've discovered that most salable fiction must shake down, in essence, to those fundamentals. And those basics are found in every good story, be it in whatever category you will. Personally, I'd say a science fiction story is a fantasy in which the development is based on tangible gimmicks with at least a pseudoscientific basis under them. I really feel, however, that the term denotes a background rather than a basic; just as the term western fiction is obviously a background. And I think the impossibility of really defining science fiction with any degree of accuracy, is the reason for the continuous hassle that goes on among the readers. The readership has broken up into groups, each of which has its own definition of science fiction. Probably nothing more than personal taste is behind the definitions, but that makes each group no less militant in defense of the story-type it favors. And there is no reason why each should not defend his own. The day these arguments cease is the day we can be sure science fiction interest is on the wane. So. let's just say science fiction is something that can't be defined but when you see it, you know it's there. Sincerely, pwf. How can we possibly amount to much when our fathers were sold at auction a scant five thousand years ago ? Let My People Gd By Walter Miller, Jr. lous!" growled Wolek Parn, glaring fixedly at the scope which displayed the planet's surface as a mottled green pattern of pale luminescence. "Look at them. Just look!" The others said nothing. Taut faces, with eyes locked to the screen. The planet lay seven thousand miles from their landing site on its moon, but the magnification pulled the surface toward them so that they watched it as if from an altitude of thirty miles. There were continents, oceans, islands, peninsulas. The land appeared splotched and spotted, as if by variations in flora between highland and lowland. All this had been expected, predicted by Merrigull's calculations. A planet for colonization, and they had reached it after thirteen years of journeying across the blackness of interstellum. Now they were here, and the planet indeed was inhabitable. Furthermore, it was already inhabited. "There's another one!" Wolek Pam breathed as a checkerboard pattern of tiny squares drifted into view near the planet's misty limb. "Six, maybe seven miles square. That's no native village!" He turned to peer at their faces by the glow-light from the scope. Morgun Sahl, biologist -- a tall gaunt man with a saturnine face, he showed no emotion except for a flicker at the corner of his mouth that might have been indicative of bitterness or of grim amusement. A wiry shock of black hair dangled over his forehead. He was a Lincolnesque Machiavelli with a sour drawl. Beside him stood Faron Qun, chemist, mineralogist -- a shorter man with straw hair and a quiet scholarly face, small featured, slightly pudgy, usually smiling. The smile was absent now. He looked like a small boy at a funeral, and the glow of the screen made his face seem abnormally pale. He held the launch pilot's arm, squeezed it spasmodically. It was a soft arm, milk-white and scattered with tiny freckles, and it belonged to Alaia Dazille -- a tall girl, not beautiful, but cool and pleasant, with red-brown hair, a narrowtival face, and hazel eyes that could shine with friendly amusement and suddenly switch to the cold glitter of sarcasm. Wolek Parn had met women that reminded him of gardenias and fine wine. Alaia Dazille, however, made him think of geraniums and buttermilk. She responded to his stare with a questioning flicker of her eyebrows. She was trying hard not to be frightened. "Well, Alaia?" She shook her head. "Don't ask me anything Skipper." He glanced at the chemist. "Faron?" Qun seemed to shudder. "No opinion. Ask our biologist." "All right, Sahl," Parn growled. "We spent thirteen years getting here. Shall we spend another thirteen going back home?" Morgun Sahl watched the slow drift of the checkerboard patterns on the scope. "I'm sure you mean that," he grunted sourly. "Maybe I do. Why shouldn't I?" The big man shrugged. "How old would you be, Pam, when we got back? Sixty?" "Fifty-nine." "You started in the prime of life. You get back approaching retirement age. Twenty-six years gone for nothing. And you don't get paid a nickel for your trouble." He smiled humorlessly and tapped the scope with his finger. "There's your pay, Skipper. Epsilon Eridani Two. You won't turn it down." Parn scowled. "You think we can land right in the middle of somebody else's civilization and start a colony?" the corner of his mouth thoughtfully for a moment. He gestured at the screen again. "They, whoever they are, undoubtedly know we're here. The ship's big enough, and the moon is close enough, so that they can see us with a small telescope. Creatures that build cities that size probably are advanced enough to spot us and recognize us for what we are: alien invaders. Undoubtedly they're already reacting to what they see." "And what kind of a reaction?" The biologist shook his head. "Impossible to guess. Anger -- hys. teria -- terror. Or maybe cold analysis and planning. I suggest we just wait and see." "And wind up with a fleet of guided missiles coming up to greet us?" "Maybe." "What kind of creatures do you think we'd find on such a planet?" The biologist was slow to answer. "Well, life always takes about the same pattern everywhere we've found it. It's never been too radically different. The basic protoplasm is always the same, or we can't call it 'life.' This planet is very earthlike. The sun is cooler than our Sol, but there's enough ultraviolet for vegetation. I believe the life-forms will be similar to what Earth has developed at various periods in her history." "Which might be anything from a duck-billed platypus to a dinosaur," Parn fumed. "And the cities might be insect hives." With an exclamation of disgust, Wolek Parn snapped a switch, flooding the compartment with light. He turned off the scope and paced to his desk where he dropped wearily into his seat and faced them, arms draped across his legs, his shoulders slumped dejectedly. "We can send a launch down, of course," hb said gloomily. "But it'll be a one-way trip because of fuel considerations. If it goes down, it stays. And so it has to take a load of colonists with it, or somebody gets left behind in the long run. How can I send twenty-four guinea pigs down into the hands of -- of what?" Sahl shrugged. "You can ask for volunteers." Parn leaned forward, clasped his head in his hands, and shook it slowly. "Eventually, I guess I'll have to. Right now, I'm faced with telling them. About the cities. They've been impatient as hell to know what's going on. Why we landed here. A few more hours and they'll start getting mad." first time. "Why don't you put it to them as a vote, Skipper? Make them responsible for deciding." "Suppose they decide to load everybody in the launches and go down right now?" "Well -- suppose they do? Can you say definitely that it's the wrong decision?" "No, I guess not." "I can," Sahl growled. "But you needn't give them that choice. Ask for volunteers for a first launch, then let the volunteers decide whether they want to jump right in, or wait and see if there's any reaction to our presence here on the planet's moon." Parn nodded thoughtfully and sighed. "I guess it's the only thing to do." There was a brief silence, suddenly interrupted by a knock at the entrance. "Colonists," Parn mut-. tered, "wanting to know what's up." He raised his voice. "Okay! Come in!" The hatch opened, and a young officer leaned inside without entering. "It's Rulian, Sir. He wants to see you." "Ru -- I thought I sent him out to scout the surface." "He's back, Sir." "All right, send him in." , The officer nodded and vanished. A pudgy, florid man stepped hurriedly inside. He was panting slightly, appeared to . be nervous. He still wore a pressure suit, but the helmet had been removed. He brushed at his disheveled hair and gazed at Parn. "Well, what is it? Surely you didn't have time to finish -- " Rulian shook his head quickly. "No, Sir. We got halfway to the hills. And then we came back. We thought you ought to know right away." "Know what?" The scout held something out on the palm of his hand -- a torn bit of metal. Parn frowned questioningly. "Looks like -- maybe a shearedoff rivet. So?" "Just brought it back so you wouldn't think I was off my rocker, Skipper." "What are you talking about?" "Out there -- on ' the surface. There's the entrance to a tunnel, with an air-lock. A meteorite clobbered it -- long time ago, maybe." He tossed the bit of metal on Parn's desk. "That's from the wreckage of the lock." A hush fell over them. Parn reached for the bit of metal, rolled it around in his palm with a blunt finger. Morgun Sahl was the first to break the silence. "Well, Skipper -- I guess that determines what we do next." "Eh? Oh, yes. Sahl, I guess the job is yours, since we don't have an archeologist aboard. Pick whoever you need." Sahl glanced at Faron Qun and Alaia. "You two want to go?" The girl glanced at Qun. The chemist paused, then nodded. "We'll get suits and meet you outside." Chapter II and sunswept under a lurid sky. The moon possessed a thin atmosphere of xenon and other heavy gasses that tempered the harshness of the sun-glare and painted the blackness of space with a translucent film of sky. Morgun Sahl glanced at the wrist-indicators of his suit. The pressure was around two pounds, and temperature a modest # Fahrenheit. He stood outside the lock with Rulian, waiting for Qun and Alaia, The scout was pointing to a low outcropping of rock perhaps four hundred yards from the ship. "The tunnel is just beyond that," came the scout's voice in his headsets. "Believe me, Sahl, I about dropped over when I saw it. Who do you suppose dug it?" ' The biologist shrugged, and gazed moodily at the huge but faintly visible crescent that hung in the western sky. What manner of beings were watching them and waiting for a move? Man had never before touched a planet where flourishing life was possible. There was Mars, of course, with its stunted flora and primitive fauna. And the single planet of Alpha Centauri, with its steaming oceans full of marine life, but with a climate too hot for land-life except in fertile patches in the polar regions. Here, however, under the orange glare of an Eridanian sun, lay a world nearly Earthlike. So Earthlike that the eventual development of an intelligent species was almost inevitable, according to Sahl's way of thinking. Merrigull had thought so, too, but he had allowed for a probable deviation from Earthlike conditions, and had guessed that the peculiarly human survival response called "intelligence" would not happen here. Obviously, Merrigull had guessed wrong. And one hundred and twenty colonists were left holding the bag, visitors without reservations, discovering too late that the inn was already full. Certainly the visitors would not be welcome. The only question in Sahl's mind pertained to the amount of resistance the Eridanian life-forms would offer to their coming. It might be anything from grudging tolerance to fanatical opposition. In case of the latter, there was nothing to do but retreat, go back to Earth, if they could escape -- and try to laugh off the twenty-six lost years of life. Certainly there could be no forcing an entry into the Eridanian world against the will of the Eridanian civilization. The colony was equipped with no spectacular weapons, nor any way to maintain a technological culture for more than a generation. They had come hoping to begin with a society of small farms in some area where metals were plentiful, and to let their descendants gradually assemble the tools of a better civilization. him, and he turned to watch Alaia and Faron Qun climb down to join them. Across the cracked dry ground they strode, puffs of dust rising about their boots and drifting away on the thin breeze. The scout led them to the outcropping of rock, and they climbed it to stare at the plain beyond. The tunnel's mouth, was only a small pock-mark of blackness on the ground, but there was a glitter of metal at its rim. Sahl stared at the terrain around it, then pointed to dark splotches on the ground a hundred yards beyond the tunnel. "You examine those?" he asked. "Yeah, we looked at them. Ground looks fused. I'd guess it was used as a landing site." "Probably. How about the lock? Think we can get through it?" "Have to hoist that wrecked hatch out of the way. I think four of us can manage it. If we can't, I brought a torch." Sahl leaped from the outcrop and and drifted down the six-foot drop to level ground. The others followed. Moments later they stood at the mouth of the lock. Alaia kicked at a layer of dust with her boot, uncovered a smooth stone ramp in which the lock was set. Sahl knelt beside the torn hatchway to tug at the sheared metal door, wedged diagonally in the entranceway. "It's still fastened in one spot," he called. "Let's have that torch, Rulie." The scout fumbled at the valves of the two cylinders strapped to his back, then struck a blinding dart of blue-white flame from the handtorch. Sahl flipped a dark filter down over his visor, then played the torch slowly over the jagged metal. Minutes later, the fastening pulled loose. The hatch slipped deeper and wedged. "All right, let's heave. Don't grab the hot spot." After a concerted effort, the hatch came free with a suddenness that sent Alaia sprawling. Faron Qun quickly helped her to her feet, leaving the others to struggle with the hatch. Sahl gave him a black look, but said nothing. Beneath the lock appeared a corridor heaped with cave-in rubble, but apparently passable. Sahl stared down for a moment, then eyed the scout. "Notice anything," he grunted. "Yeah," the other muttered. "We're not going to be able to stand up down there. Looks' like a crawlway." Sahl shook his head. "It was probably designed to walk in all right -- but the designers evidently aren't very tall. Four feet high at the most." He stepped into the wrecked lock and let himself down gingerly to the top of the rubble heap. He crouched to shine a light down along the corridor, then glanced up at the others. "Can't see much. Let's go down. We'll stick close together. And don't touch anything that you don't understand." He slid feet-first down the heap of rubble and crouched in the gloom below. The others followed. "Last man ought to blaze a trail somehow, as we move along," he called. "So we won't get lost down here." of rock from the heap and scratched it experimentally on the wall. It left a discernible mark. Sahl nodded and turned to move along the narrow corridor. After a few paces, he went to his hands and knees and crawled. The ceiling was too low to permit walking without crouching uncomfortably. Blackness engulfed them, except for the light thrown by Sahl's handlamp. They passed a turn and came to a second hatch. Sahl ran his flash around the edge. "Tight seal," he grunted. "Another lock." "They've probably got the place split into compartments in case of a leak," Faron offered. Sahl heaved at the door with his shoulder, but it failed to budge. "Try that button," Alaia suggested. The biologist snorted, but pressed the stud beside the hatch and held it down. With his helmet pressed against the metal, he thought he heard the feeble click of a relay, but the hatch remained closed. "That disk," she called, reaching over his shoulder. "Might be an emergency hand-control." "All right, turn it," he growled. She twisted it hard. After two turns, Sahl glanced down to see a tiny spurt of dust licking up from a valve an inch above floor level. It startled him. He had expected no pressure to remain in the lock. When the jet of dust subsided, he heaved against the door again. It swung slowly open, revealing the inside of the lock. "We'll have to go through it two at a time," he said, then paused. "Anybody think to bring a weapon?" No one answered for a moment. Then Faron snapped irritably, "Why should we, Sahl? Don't be silly!" "Yeah. I'm being silly. Come on, Rulie, let's go through." They crawled into the lock and closed the hatch. Sahl closed the valve from the inside, and found a similar control for the inner door. Then he watched the fabric of his suit go slowly slack as the 'pressure built up in the lock. "Open it." Rulie grunted. A slight tug brought the thick hatch swinging inward. They stared beyond the door into a long domed A Beaten by despair, she stoically awaited her fate. TSr, room. The ceiling seemed to glow faintly, and Sahl extinguished his flashlight to check it. Bands of faint luminosity provided a dim glowlight to the room. The last feeble flicker, he guessed, of a lighting system abandoned long ago. layer of dust lay thick over the., ledges and across the floor. The dust was marked in places, but the marks were not fresh, and dust had partially covered them again. They closed the hatch behind them so that the others could come through. Sahl glanced at his pressure gauge. "Twelve pounds,' he muttered. "I'm going to try a sniffer." Rulie protested. "Might get a lungful of chlorine! I can test for oxygen .with the torch."  Sahl yelped and snatched it away from him before he struck a spark. "Might get worse than a lungful of chlorine if you strike that thing in here!" Rulie muttered apologetically. Sahl touched the sniffer valve at the side of his helmet and opened it a tenth of a turn, then cut off his oxygen supply and waited until the pressure in his suit fell to twelve pounds. Then he inhaled deeply several times. "Don't smell anything," he called, "rtn going to open it all the way. If I keel over, catch me." The air in the room smelled musty, but after a minute's experimental breathing he removed his helmet. Rulie loosened his own helmet, but the biologist tightened it for him again. "If I'm all right after half an hour," he shouted against Rulie's visor, "you can take it off." The others followed them through the lock and looked around quickly. Without his helmet, Sahl could not hear their conversation except as a muffled murmur from behind their visors. He motioned for them to follow, then crossed the room to enter another corridor beyond. Somewhere in the station, nuclear reactors were still seeping a trickle of energy that kept a faint glow of light from the ceiling, and he hoped that Faron would be able to estimate the age of the place from radioactive decay. He sent Rulie back to call the Ark. As they progressed through a series of corridors, rooms and other locks, Sahl grew deeply puzzled. This was no observatory, nor was it an experimental station. It had apparently beep used as a transfer point to space, a way-station where landing launches from the planet shifted cargo or passengers with larger ships too bulky to land on the mother-world. Why had it been abandoned? Oxygen was still being released from the rocks. The place was still in fair condition. Had the builders abandoned space entirely? The station was not large, and an 'hour's exploration brought them to its limits. Faron had discovered the reactors in a vault beneath the main level, where they supplied heat to an extensive bank of thermopiles which still delivered a trickle of power to 'the equipment. Faron let himself down into the vault to examine the equipment, while the others continued to explore the main level, having removed their helmets to breathe the still air of the station. zling over a four-foot cube of transparent plastic that rested on a low pedestal in the center of the floor. "Know what it's for?" he asked. She shook her head and took a last swipe at the dust that covered it. "It's clear except for a few specks of something. Air bubbles maybe." Sahl extinguished his light and noticed that she stepped away from him quickly in the darkness. He grinned sourly to himself, and waited until his eyes adjusted to the lack of light. "What's the idea?" she muttered suspiciously. "Look at the specks in the plastic." "Why -- they shine faintly ! Why?" "Probably bits of radioactive material covered with a phosphor." He studied it in silence for a moment. One group of dots appeared to be joined by a web of fine lines. Their colors ranged from dull red to blue-white, and they varied in he said suddenly. "That small orange one near the center of the web. Epsilon Eridani, their sun." "Why the web?" . "Probably indicates the places their ships have -- " He stopped suddenly and sucked in his breath. The web included Sol. Alaia interpreted his silence. "I wonder how long ago," she murmured. Sahl turned as footsteps approached from behind. It was Rulie, and he seemed puzzled by an object in his hand. He held it out and stared at Morgun Sahl. "Bone, Sahl?" The biologist took the six-inch fragment and turned it over once. His hands seemed to freeze as they held it, and he was silent for several seconds. "Where did you find this, Rulie?" "Back by the rubble heap, when I went back out to check with the Ark. Why? What is it?" The biologist looked up slowly. "Piece of a human tibia," he said, and his voice was somehow flat. tion!" Parn was saying as he paced the floor of his cabin, occasionally glancing at Sahl. "What's that, Skipper?" "An Earth civilization that archeologists don't know anything about. A civilization that got to space before it died out and disappeared." "I don't think so," Sahl disagreed quickly. "A civilization like that would leave too many traces. If primitive architectural ruins stand for thousands of years, as in Egypt -- think how long the remains of a technological culture would endure. No, Skipper, I don't agree at all." "All right, damn it! How do you explain that piece of bone." "I don't." Pam snorted irritably. "Do you even know it's human?" The biologist shrugged. "You got the surgeon's opinion to confirm my own." "Isn't there any way to tell how old it is?" "The lab's working on it, but they aren't very experienced at that sort of thing." "What about this carbon# method?" Sahl nodded indifferently. "They'll try it, but we can't trust results." "Why not? I thought it was very accurate?" "It is -- on Earth, where we know the percentage of radioactive carbon ingested during life. But how long had the fellow been away from Earth? And what percentage did he get while he was away? Was he even bom on Earth?" Pam clenched his fists and began beating his knuckles together with thoughtful regularity while he paced the floor. "Maybe humanoid creatures evolve wherever it's possible," he ventured. "Maybe the cities down there are -- " "What about those four-foot ceilings in the station?" Sahl interrupted. "That tibia came from a man about our height." Parn clucked irritably. "Well, you said some of the ceilings were ten feet and over. "Why don't you judge from that?' Sahl smiled wryly. "How about -- say -- the Cathedral of Notre Dame. Would you judge the stature of the builders by the height of the nave, or by the size of the smallest door?" Parn grunted defeat. "All right, why don't you venture an opinion." "It'd be more in the nature of a wild guess, I think." "Make it, then." "Well -- let's turn the situation around. Suppose we had come here as explorers rather than as colonists. Suppose we landed on the planet and found a semi-intelligent species, and we were interested in studying it further. Suppose we captured a few, and carried them back home for breeding purposes." as if to interrupt, but Sahl continued : "That three-dimensional star-map we found makes me think the builders have visited Sol. If they visited it before Man began civilizing himself, we'd have no legends, nor any trace of the visit. They could have made off with a few humans and we'd never know it had happened." "Why would they want humans?" Sahl shrugged. "Why do we catch wild animals and put them in cages? Why did we domesticate dogs? Curiosity, maybe some usefulness. Man has brought back specimens from every planet he's ever visited. Maybe he's been a specimen himself. It's just a guess." "Pretty wild guess, if you ask me," Pam snorted. "Human beings would be rather dangerous pets to have around." "Would they? Humans have made pets -- or slaves -- of humans." Parn slumped into a chair, shaking his head slowly. "None of which answers the question: 'What are we going to do?' " "How are the colonists taking it?" ' "Better than I expected. They're restless, but quiet. Maybe too quiet. I don't know. I let them out of the ship to roam around. They work off steam that way." "If they're not getting disturbed," Sahl offered, "I suggest we wait until we've gone over that station with a fine-tooth comb. Faron is still puzzling over the reactors. And we might learn more about the builders by closer study of the interior structure." "How?" "Well, by measuring dimensions, for one thing. The shape of the doorways suggest that they're small bipeds -- or at least, their height is about three times their width. And Faron found something else down in the reactor vault that might be significant." "What's that?" "A pair of goggles, a circuit diagram, and a place to sit down. The goggles are too closely spaced for human eyes, and perfectly round, but the strap just about fits my head. The circuit diagram is hung on a wall, and we have to stoop to read it. And the' seat would be about the right height for a child with a foothigh knee." Pam threw up his hands. "All right. Go ahead and study all you want to. Until they start shooting at us, anyway." Sahl glanced at the scope, noticed that it was on. He grinned. "Been watching for them to start?" "I've been watching. Now get out, Sahl. I got some worrying to do. Go find Alaia." The biologist stiffened. "What makes you say that?" "Eh? What makes -- ?" The captain paused, smirked sadistically. "Oh, sorry. I must have been thinking of Faron Qun, eh? Don't slam the door." Sahl left it open instead, but he heard it slam when Parn got up to close it. He smiled irritably, and went down through the colonists' quarters to listen to the chatter. But the chatter was absent. Gloom pervaded the ship. He felt it hanging tensely, murderously, in the air, waiting to become rage or rebellion or sudden popular decision. These people were not going back to Earth. They had gambled thirteen years and they didn't intend to quit as losers. He passed quietly through the passenger-areas of the ship, and stopped at his own quarters long enough to slip into a pressure suit. He stopped again at Alaia's cabin, hesitating before the door. But he moved on without knocking. It might embarrass someone if Faron Qun were with her. Sahl tried to grin his way around the twinge of anger that followed the thought, but he failed to rid himself of it. and stepped out through the lock. Lunar night, with the planet's The colonists had tagged the planet "Merrigull's Guesswork", had later shortened it to "Guesswork", Sahl had idly speculated that after a dozen, or ten dozen generations, appearance. Their number-system was octal, suggesting perhaps fourfingered hands. Their written language was not phonetic, but seemed to be based on a system of ideographs, and a rather complicated system at that. It occurred to Sahl that they might not communicate by sound-waves, but he dismissed the notion as growing out of fragmentary evidence. A telephone circuit had been run from the Ark to the underground station. It began jangling frantically"Sahl!" Pam bellowed when he picked it up. "A spacecraft has been sighted about five miles away, over the hills! It's just hanging there on its jets, watching us. Get. back to the Ark. Everybody." The biologist gathered an incredulous frown. "What kind of a ship?" he gasped. "Sleek little rocket. About half the size of a launch. Hurry back. If it lands, I want you to size up the occupants." "Okay, Skipper. But I doubt that there're any of them in it. I'll bet it's a remote control ship, or a computer-piloted job." "Why? What makes you say that?" "Simple. They don't know anything about us. They're probably holding up a hat on a stick to see if we'll shoot at it, and maybe to see what kind of weapons we've got. I'll be right out." He hung up and yelled at the others, then scrambled through the lock and out of the station. He paused to peer at the dark sky in search of the ship, then found it at about thirty degrees above the horizon in the west. A silvery sliver that glittered in the sun, nose pointed skyward as if landing. But the thrust of its jets just matched the tug of gravity, and it hung motionless in mid-air, breathing a fiery tail downward, Sahl sprinted toward the Ark. Faron and Alaia and several others of the staff were assembled in Parn's cabin when he burst inside. The Captain waved him to a seat. Faron was speaking. "It's probably a television ship sent to scan us, Skipper. I think we ought to make some friendly gesture toward it, or at least not behave hostilely. We could probably bring it down with a few bursts, but it'd undoubtedly lead to trouble." "No question about that," Parn muttered. "Well, Said? You itching to say something?" "Yes. Give me a pilot and a launch and permission to blast off and approach the vessel cautiously." "Wh -- why? Suppose it shot you down? We'd lose a launch, and twenty-four people will be stranded. No, I can't do it." He shook his head quickly. "Of course it's a risk, but it might pay off. Suppose it is a robot ship? If I can board it and ride it back to the planet, we've gotten an emissary down there without wasting a launch." Parn sat with his mouth open for a moment, then shouted: "And suppose it's a one-way ship? Suppose it doesn't go back -- but only sits there and -- " "Skipper!" A low gasp from Alaia who had been watching die screen. They stared. The small rocket, motionless at first, had begun to move. Tilting its axis at a slight angle, it began whisking rapidly to ward them. Wolek Parn went white and began jabbing buttons. "Man emergency stations, all hands!" he bellowed into the intercom. "All hands in pressure suits, man the launches! Prepare for blast-off!" Alaia and the other launch pilots scrambled through the door. Faron raced for the reactor room. Sahl sat 'quietly staring at the screen. "Well, everybody got some exercise anyhow," he said as the rocket landed on the flats beyond the tunnel's mouth, fanning up ' great whirls of scorched dust. He climbed to his feet. "Coming?" he grunted over his shoulder. "Don't go out there!" Pam barked. "Let them make a first move." "They've already made it," he called back through the hatch. "If they wanted to mess us up, a few armor piercing shells are all they needed to do the job. Coming?" Mumbling irritably, the Captain reached for his helmet. Chapter IV the rockef was a slender spire through the thin haze as they left the Ark's lock and began walking slowly across the lunar plain. "See that black hole in the hull?" Pam snapped. "They're either watching us or aiming at us." "I see it. Let's keep walking." "Probably a television camera, eh?" "If it makes you feel any better to think so." "Sgerul ingbagge khannil du ?" came a third voice on the interhelmet communicator frequency. The men glanced at each other nervously. Sahl shook his head. "It wasn't me, Skipper." Parn set his jaw and glared' fixedly at the rocket as they approached. A hatch slid open in its side, revealing an empty lock. Something began snaking down from the lock toward the ground. "What the -- !" "A ladder!" Sahl breathed. "A flexible ladder. They want us to come up. What do you think?" Pam paused. "I -- I don't like it. I wish they'd show themselves." He paused again. "But we've got to face them sometime, I guess." "Yeah." They stood at the foot of the ladder, looking up the wall of gleaming metal toward the lock. A lense, projecting from the side of the ship had turned downward to survey them with its mechanical gaze. Sahl grunted nervously and started climbing. Soon he felt Parn coming after him. What manner of creatures were they about to meet? Or was the ship remotely piloted? Once they were inside, would it blast off without warning -- a specimen bottle that had been filled? He scrambled up into the lock and stood gazing back toward the Ark as Parn climbed up after him. raent of you runs contrary to your ethical system. We did not realize it before the hypnotic interview. You are not prisoners. We wished only to establish contact, and to study you. We welcome your colony to our planet." the reclining figure beyond the glass partition. The puffy, Neanderthaloid features of the saffron man, and the small circular tattoo on his shoulder, and the simple white loincloth that he wore did not somehow jibe with the complex science suggested by the visible equipment. The man's head was bald, with a heavy protruding brow and a small flat skull. His body was thick and heavy, with long arms and broad hands. Sahl imagined that he would stoop when standing, for his shoulders, though thick, seemed steeply sloping. "May I ask some questions?" he grunted. "Certainly," purred the loudspeaker. "Are you the dominant race on the planet?" "Yes." "Are your ancestors locally evolved?" "Yes." Sahl hesitated, staring at the man. He shook his head slowly. Somehow he could not believe that the fellow was not originally descended of Earth stock. "Apparently your race has explored extensively in space during its history. Why did you give it up?" A brief pause, then: "We found what we regard as a more mature goal than mere widespread expansion. For thousands of years our activities have been directed toward the biologic integration of all lifeforms on our planet." "Into a world-organism, you mean?" "Ultimately perhaps. Interdependence and elimination of destructive parasitism are the immediate goals. Symbiosis rather than conflict. You might call it biologic socialism." "With your race leading and integrating?" "Naturally." It sounded plausible, Sahl thought. Perhaps earthlings would someday become bored with the stars and turn back to their own planet to "rule over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and all living creatures". For they had never really tried to do so, had never tried world-wide schemes of biologic control. "But why," he said slowly, "are you ready to invite outsiders? What makes you think we would cooperate?" time, then: "We have taken in other outsiders. The fauna and flora of our planet is no longer local, but a composite -- made up of selected species from forty star-systems. You will find it something like an artificial garden. It would be virtually impossible for you not to cooperate." Sahl wondered how much information had been gleaned from him along with his language. Quite a lot, he guessed, since the very structure of a language implied many things about the linguistic animal that spoke it. "Maybe you understand," he said slowly, "why we came here. We want to establish a colony and try to equip it with our own brand of culture. Our culture is expansive, exploitive. I fail to see how it could fit in without some strong shift in cultural goal." "That would be expected." Sahl frowned. "You don't understand. Our cultural continuity is as important to us as 'genetic continuity." "Why?" The biologist groped for an explanation. "A leader of one of our primitive tribes once put it this way, when his own culture was dying. He said, 'In the beginning, God gave to every people a cup of clay, from which it drank its life. Now our cup is broken.' " The Eridanian was silent for a long time. When he spoke, his tone remained unchanged -- for the machine had but one tone, one rhythm of speech. But Sahl somehow felt an aura of menace associated with the words. "If you wish to survive, you must come to our planet. If you come to our planet, you must conform to our patterns and our plans. You cannot come to expand and exploit." Sahl weighed it carefully for a moment. "Before we decide, may we send a delegation down to look around?" "That was anticipated," came the quick reply. "We will take your delegation down and bring it back." A pause, then: "Wolek Parn has awakened. We will speak with him. Then you may return to your ship to discuss the matter among yourselves if you wish." There was a click, and the loudspeaker went dead. A sudden thought came to him. How did the fellow know Parn was awake? He had not moved nor opened his eyes. Sahl watched him carefully. His lips still moved, but no sound penetrated the glass wall. Evidently the translator's output had been channelled to another compartment. Evidently the fellow was talking to Parn. Two hours of waiting and watching followed, two hours during which a suspicion flickered in his mind, and grew to proportions of near-certainty: the man who lay on the table and talked was a cat's paw, a servant of something else. But who was using him? Observation failed to answer the question or even confirm the suspicion. A panel slid open behind him, revealing the door to the airlock. His helmet lay on the floor. He fastened it quickly in place, and the airlock opened. Simultaneously Parn entered it from a flanking hatch. They glanced at each other silently, grimly, but neither spoke. Before the hatch closed behind Parn, Sahl saw another glass cubicle beyond it. Another suspicion entered his mind: that this ship had been designed specifically for this one mission. Moments later, they were descending the ladder to the plain below, and the comforting beam of a searchlight picked them up from the Ark. It was night, and the warm tinted crescent of the planet shone overhead. Somehow it seemed gloomy and forbidding. Chapter V viewed all four of us separately," said Parn when they were back in the Ark again. "Let's compare notes. I'll begin with what happened to me." The Skipper related his conversation with the Eridanian matterof-factly, and it differed only in detail from Sahl's experience. The Skipper apparently had reacted more angrily, but the general line of discussion was the same. The same was true of the others, except for Faron Qun, who apparently had been more eager than the rest to take advantage of the Eridanian's "generous offer", as he put it. "Let's get it straight," Pam grunted. "I said flatly that we wouldn't fit in like a cog in somebody else's wheel. Sahl took a dim view of it. Alaia kept her mouth shut -- which was probably smart. And Faron, you thought their offer was a good idea." "I still do." "That remains to be seen. The point is, they probably realize now that there's going to be a diversity of opinion among us. They might try to take advantage of it somehow. But the main question of course is: 'What the devil do they have in mind for us?' " "They seem to want us, all right," muttered the girl. "But why?" "Maybe the delegation can find out." "That brings up the question of who's going." Alaia glanced around quickly. "How about us?" Parn shook his head, grinning wryly. "Not you, Ala. I'll send Qun and Sahl." The girl reddened angrily, fell silent. Faron Qun touched her arm lightly. "I'd rather you'd stay where it's safer..."  "Excuse me. Skipper," Sahl interrupted sourly. "But I think we'd better have a pilot along, just in case." Faron snorted contemptuously. "In case of what?" "In case we have to seize the ship and come back on our own." "Of all the silly -- " "Maybe it's not so silly, Faron," Parn growled. "I believe you're right, Sahl." "Not Alaia, of course, but -- " She bounded to her feet angrily. "Why not Alaia?" she demanded. Parn sighed and shrugged. "All three of you go, then. I'll have to stay and watch over the brood, I guess. Try to get them to establish radio contact with us, so you can keep us informed." danian ship bearing the three Earthlings spaceward, climbed a column of flame. They sat locked in a small but comfortably furnished compartment until blast-off was accomplished and acceleration fell to something around a gravity. They waited. The compartment was locked. Sahl rapped sharply at the door, but there was no answer. "No sightseeing, permitted," he grunted suspiciously. "They probably just want to keep a balanced loading, so they don't want us moving around." Sahl glanced at the pilot. "Think so?" he muttered. She frowned at him irritably, but shook her head. "I doubt it. They must have automatic trimming mechanisms to correct for slight load unbalance." "No sightseeing permitted, then," he reasserted. Faron sneered slightly. "You've got a lousy attitude, Sahl. It makes me sick." "That's too bad," the biologist sympathized quietly. Alaia glanced from one to the other jf them. Then she twisted Faron's ear with playful sternness. "Sorry, darling, but you're out of line this time." t He reddened, and fell silent. An hour passed. Alaia, normally calm, began to seem restless. She moved about the small compartment nervously, peering at each fixture and marking. "This ship is new," she muttered. "Brand new! I'll bet it's the first flight." Sahl watched her, but said nothing. She reached a grille-covered vent over the hatch and tried to pull herself up to peer through it. The grille came free and she fell clumsily. Faron helped her up, while the biologist stared up at the opening with interest. "Only a ventilator duct," she said. "Yeah, but -- " Sahl stood up. "Might be big enough to Crawl through." "Not for you." Sahl glanced at her. She might be slender enough to wiggle into the duct, unless her hips... "Get that notion out of your head, Sahl!" Faron snapped. He picked up the grille and moved toward the opening to replace it. "Put it down," Sahl said tonelessly. Something about his voice made Faron hesitate. Alaia said, "Let me try it. I want a look at the control room." "You're not going to do it," Faron growled, blocking the duct opening. "Move, Faron," murmured the biologist. "Let's not have a tussle." "Let's do." "It would be rather one-sided, I'm afraid," Sahl grunted, producing an automatic. "Ever get pistolwhipped, Qun?" "Wh -- where did you get that? What do you mean by bringing a weapon? This is supposed to be a peaceful -- " "Yeah. Now move. Help her up in the duct." Faron stepped reluctantly aside, his face bright with anger. Alaia gave him a peculiar glance, then scrambled up and into the opening without assistance. She glanced back at Sahl and beckoned him close. "Three openings just up ahead. Watch down the duct in case I get caught." He handed her the gun and nodded. "Don't go too far. Return trip'll be harder, backing up." She stuffed the gun in her belt and gave Faron a warning look. "You better keep your temper, F.Q." She crawled slowly out of sight. Faron glared at the biologist; "Fool! Don't you imagine they're watching us? Know exactly what's going on?" "I doubt it. They're probably too busy to bother." He climbed to the duct opening and glanced along it. Alaia's body blocked the light from the other openings toward the front of the ship, but faintly he could hear her moving. "Well?" Faron growled. "You watch if you want to." Sahl returned to a seat. Faron peered along the dark duct for several minutes. "She's reached another grille," he muttered suddenly. "I can see the light -- and -- oh! no!" "What's wrong?" "The grille came loose. She -- Alaia, no! No!" then another. He scrambled for the opening, as Faronbegan beating frantically at the hatch. "They saw her! They shot her!" Sahl stared toward the faint light a dozen yards down the duct. He could see her faintly, her arm dangling from the 'opening. She lay very still. Somewhere someone was screaming gibberish. "Help me!" Faron howled. "Help me get it open!" Together they battered the locked hatch. The light metal door seemed to give slightly with each crash. After four tries, the lock gave way, and they spilled out into the corridor. A few paces away, the saffronskinned man stood staring at them idiotically. Suddenly he opened his mouth and screamed. After a moment, he screamed again -- without moving. Scalp crawling, Sahl darted around him. He seemed not to see them, but continued screaming as they ran down the corridor. Faron kicked open a hatch, then froze. Sahl's gun lay on the floor beyond it, and Alaia's hand hung limply down from above. And there was something else. A small manlike creature with a huge head lay dead in a pool of red-brown blood near an instrument panel, his skull from the automatic. A fat handweapon with multiple barrels was still clutched in his small fist. "See about Alaia," Sahl snapped, grabbing up the gun. "I'll watch the corridor." Faron stepped inside and felt her wrist. "Thank God," he breathed, "she's alive. Unconscious." "Wounded badly?" "I -- I can't tell." He paused. "There's something stuck in her face. Help me get her down." Sahl paused. Another saffron crewman was coming along the corridor, feeling his way and stumbling, as if blinded. He kept pawing at his head. He moved past Sahl without glancing at him. The biologist watched him go, then stepped inside and helped Faron haul the limp girl down out of the duct. "Damn you, Sahl! Now we're in trouble, bad trouble!" "All right, save it till later, will you? There's no time to fight about it now." They stretched her out on the floor and examined her for wounds. "Nothing," Faron muttered. "Except these little red marks on her face, and -- " He bent over her and jerked three tiny splinters from her cheek and' laid them on his palm. "Crystals. Sharp little crystals." and felt her pulse. "I'd say she was drugged." He arose and crossed the cabin to bend over the dead creature. He disentangled the weapon from a slender four-digital hand and inspected it closely. He drew back what seemed to be a charging-plunger, then aimed at the dead thing and flicked a switch. It kicked in his hand and emitted a dull cough. Six crystals appeared, stuck in a patch of the creature's hide. They began to volatilize at once. "Anaesthetic crystals," he guessed. "Must be quick acting, but not quick enough to keep Ala from shooting back when she got stung." "This is terrible!" Faron mourned. "Now they'll never let us colonize." "Wake up, fellow," Sahl snapped, pointing at the dead creature. "That's one of our hosts, not the idiots with orange hides." He tossed Faron the Eridanian's weapon and stepped through the hatch. "I'm going to search the ship, see if he's the only one." He moved warily along the corridors, peering cautiously into each compartment. He found one other saffron servant, curled up in the foetal position on the floor of a cabin. The man did not look up. There were no other creatures like the one Alaia had killed. And the three servants -- if such they were -- appeared to be completely demented. They seemed unaware of their surroundings, stared vacuous ly at nothing. The search convinced him that automatic devices were keeping the rocket on a constant heading with respect to the planet's gravitic field -- which would make it a spiralling course with respect to a fixed framework. Unless the devices corrected when they reached the atmosphere, or unless they could get control of the ship, they would go in like a meteor and crash. He returned to the compartment where Alaia lay moaning but still unconscious. Faron was studying the instrument panels. He turned away white-faced to stare at the biologist. His voice was high and tense. "Do you realize this is the control cabin? That thing was piloting the ship! Somebody's got to take over!" "He's the only one of his kind aboard. I guess it'll have to be you. I'm a mechanical moron, Qun." Faron groaned. "I can't even pilot one of our own ships. And we'll never be able to read the markings on these instruments, or know what they mean. The controls Zoo A: .fairly simplified, but -- " He shook his head, pointed at the screen. The ship seemed to be plunging surfaceward at a shallow angle. "We've got to get Alaia awake. Maybe she can analogize between those gadgets and familiar controls." Faron growled a low curse and went to the hatch. "I'm going to see if I can't shut off the jets somehow. We might still have enough of an orbital velocity-component to carry us around the planet, if we can stop the rockets from skidding us back any more." "An orbit?" "Yeah. Probably with an underground perihelion. If we get out of this, Said, I'm going to kick your face in." "I'll be looking forward to it," the biologist murmured, as he knelt beside Alaia. instrument panel's lights began flashing frantically, and relays clattered loudly. He straightened, sensing vaguely that they were falling. His weight was diminishing rapidly. Then he noticed that the thunder of the rockets was dying. It became a dull roar, then a purr. Faron came back, "d got the reactors damped down," he said, "but it may not matter. Look at the screen." Sahl turned. The scope revealed the curving horizon of the planet, but the cross-hairs rested only a fraction of a degree above the misty limb. "Will we skim through that atmosphere?" he asked. "If we do, we'll melt the hull off at this speed. We'll just have to wait and see." He glanced down at the girl. "How is she?" "Opened her eyes once. Drifted off again. Might bring her around if we had some sort of stimulant." Faron fumbled quickly through his suit, brought out a small vial. "Neurodrine," he grunted. "I brought it along to keep awake in case we were pretty busy." The biologist took it quickly and shook out two small capsules. "You on the stuff?" he asked. "Of course not!" The vehemence of the denial made Sahl guess that Faron was at least worried about the possibility of addiction. The drug did not set up a true craving, but habitual users became listless and apathetic when it was withdrawn, and they had to continue taking it in order to stay normally alert. He took the capsules apart and emptied the white powder in Alaia's mouth. Her jaw worked spasmodically, and heTeld her mouth closed lest she reflexively spit out the bitter compound. Five minutes passed. Sahl became aware of a faint whine, high-pitched and all-per vading. He glanced at Faron who was staring at the instruments. "Upper fringes of the atmosphere!" the chemist groaned. "That whistle?" "Yeah!" He hurried out of the cabin and returned a moment later, his face taut with worry. "What's up?" Sahl asked. "The temperature. Leading edges of projections on the hull. Red spots here and there." He stared at the screen. The cross-hairs seemed a little higher above the horizon now, but the horizon's curvature was less. "We're low, too low. Maybe sixty miles." "Perihelion?" "Maybe we're at it. But if that air slows us down enough, we'll drop." She opened her eyes and pressed her hands to her temples. Her face went tense with fear. "It shot... hurt -- my face. Where?" "No time now!" Sahl grunted. "Listen to .me. You've got to get control of the ship." "The big head... the thing... is it -- ?" "Dead." She closed her eyes again and moaned. Sahl shook her hard. "Alaia! Listen tome!" "Sick... Water..." He shook her again, then pulled her up to a sitting position. She saw the dead creature, and her eyes widened. She gasped and seemed to recover a little. She stared at the control panel and shook her head. "That whine!" she gasped. "Air!" Sahl helped her to her feet. "Faron got the jets idled," he told her quickly, "but that's all. You've got to figure out the controls." She staggered toward the instrument panel and stared. "I'll never be able to read those things. But..." She looked down at the array of switches and studs. "Only two variable controls," she muttered. "The rest are on-off. I hope thisthing is -- " She touched a lever  and bent close to inspect it. "Ball and socket mounting. Can push it any direction. That means -- " She pushed it forward slightly. "No!" Faron howled. "Look at the screen!" The cross-hairs had split into a pair, one set red, the other black. The black set rested now below the horizon. "Don't worry," she muttered. "That must be just the aim of our nose. I didn't feel a course-change." She tugged back slowly on the lever. A low drone came from the instrument panel. The black crosshairs drifted slowly upward, and the planet's horizon swept completely off the screen. The scope revealed only a patch of space. "Must be a stern pick-up somewhere." She touched one of the switches under the scope, then returned it to the original position. "Magnification. And this one -- intensity. And this -- " The scene on the scope changed abruptly and the planet's surface appeared again. "That's it. Now we're looking back toward the tail." She turned abruptly to look at Faron. '.'Howdid you get the reactors damped?" "Back in the power room. Slipped in a couple of rods." "Better go slip them back like they were." lently. Minutes later, the rocket's purr became a roar again. Alaia slowly moved the second control and the thunder waned, then grew again. The ship lurched clumsily as she fumbled with the headinglever, but gradually the planet's surface lay directly tailward, and they were climbing slowly. The whine began to diminish. Faron returned from the power room to stare over her shoulder. "Wonderful!" he murmured. "Not so wonderful, maybe," she said gloomily. "We don't know what the instruments are registering. One slip and we're finished." "Can we make it back?" Sahl sskpd "Back? To the moon? No!" She shook her head emphatically. "No way to navigate." "What then?" "We'll have to get in an orbit, let me practice on the controls. Then -- there's nothing to do but try to land it somewhere down there. Unless you'd rather stay here as a permanent satellite." "They'll send other ships up after us," Faron said darkly. "They're probably watching us right now." Sahl stared at the surface revealed on the screen. "I agree that they're watching us. But I don't think thev'll send pursuit." "Why not?" "It's my guess that they don't have anything to pursue us with. I believe this rocket was specially constructed for this one task." Faron snorted contemptuously. "If they can build this one, they've certainly built others." "Why?" "Well -- " "I'm certain they could build all the ships they wanted to," Sahl continued. "And Earthlings could build humanoid robots if they wanted to. But who wants to? The Eridanians have deserted space. They don't need to build ships, except for some special purpose, like this one." "Maybe," Faron admitted. "But if we stay here very long they'll build one to come after us. If what you say is true, they certainly built this one in a hurry." The biologist nodded, glanced at Alaia. "How long will it take?" "Somewhere between five minutes and forever," she answered curtly. "Well, we land as soon as you think you can manage it. We'll have to be careful about choosing a spot. Some place pretty far from a city. Let's say -- high ground in the twilight zone." "Why twilight?" "So that if we get down, we might try to get away in the dark." He paused. "I'm going to look over the ship again and try to get something out of those crewmen. If that's what they are." Chapter VI during which the ship lurched and rocked and spun as Alaia tested the controls. He came back looking grim, and went to bend over the dead Eridanian. He pried open its jaw and stared. "Want it to say 'ah'?" Faron asked sourly. "Look," Sahl grunted, pressing back the creature's lips to expose the inside of his mouth. "Toothless  # Faron observed, "and no tongue. So?" "Look again." He inserted his finger and pressed something. A pair of gleaming white fangs slipped slowly into view. "Hollow and retractile." Faron frowned. "Poison sacs?" "No. Feeding mechanisms." "A bloodfeeder!" "Not exactly. I found something growing on one of the crewmen's backs. A parasite vegetable growth, I think. It's taken root there -- deep roots. And there's a pale green pulpy sphere on the outside. It had fang-marks on it. Seems to be full of a milky flind, but not blood. I'd say it's the Truit of the parasite growth. And the fellow's flesh is the ground it grows in." "And he's still alive?" "In a stupor. He's the one curled up on the floor. Asleep, or unconscious." "How about the others?" "They don't have it. Apparently this thing -- " He nudged the small body. -- just brought along one dinner pail." Faron shuddered. "They're slaves, then." "Maybe. Better look the other way," he said, producing a pocketknife. He made a neat incision in the throat, and studied for a moment. "Breathing tube, no real vocal cords. They can't talk, nor even make much oral noise." "Somebody was talking to us!" the chemist protested.  "Yeah, but I think this thing was using the saffron fellow as a mouthpiece; telepathic control. The human -- if he is a human -- spoke in his own language, and the machine translated. But the original thoughts must have come from this." Faron looked toward the door thoughtfully. "I can't even believe those people have a language. They act like complete idiots." Sahl looked up. "I have an idea that's withdrawal shock, rather than idiocy. If this little beastie was controlling them telepathically, they must have gotten some kind of jolt when Alaia shot it. And maybe they've been controlled so long that they've lost their own egos, lost their own personality." They looked up as the tug of acceleration decreased suddenly. "Okay," Alaia called nervously, "I guess it's now or not at all. I'm going to start down." Sahl turned to watch the planet's surface on the screen. It tilted again, revealed a horizon as she guided the ship so as to resume the process of cancelling out its orbital velocity component. "I'll have to do it fast," she called. "We're too close to the atmosphere. You'd better lie down -- or sit." to deafening proportions, and Sahl felt his weight tripling under the force of the thrust. He sat braced against the wall, watched Alaia's face sag under the pressure. Soon the whine of atmospheric friction returned, and grew into a wild shriek. He inched away from the wall as it began to bum his back. Faron mopped his face with a heavy hand. "Hot," he gasped. "Lord, it's getting hot!" "How's it coming?" Sahl shouted, but the girl was too tensely absorbed to answer. After a time the shriek seemed to diminish slightly, became a low howl, then a muffled drumming, scarcely audible above the roar of the rockets. The minutes crawled slowly past, and gradually the surface markings on the screen stopped their crawl. Their normal weight had returned, and the sound of the jets ceased to be deafening. "How's it coming?" he called again. This time she answered. "We're just about stationary. Sitting on our thrust at -- oh, somewhere between twenty and thirty miles. I think I've located the radar-altimeter -- by watching it crawl back -- but I still can't read it." "Can you tell the zero-mark on it?" the chemist called. "Yes. But I'm afraid to trust it. There's some kind of adjustment on the dial." "There's a small transparency port in the power room," Faron called. "Want me to watch it?" "Yes. I'll go down at about a mile a minute until vye're a couple of miles up. Think you can yell when we're at about ten-thousand feet?" "I'll try," he muttered. "How'll you judge our rate of descent?" She tapped an instrument dial. "This thing seems to be an acceleration balance. It sits on this center mark when the thrust is just right to make me feel my normal weight. I've been comparing the reading with the feel of the thrust. We'll start down slow, then keep it on the center mark. Warn me if we seem to be dropping too fast." Faron shook his head, muttered pessimistically, and left the cabin. The biologist sat watching the scope and feeling helpless. Slowly the surface markings spread, grew larger. The land was rising to meet them. Faron burst into the cabin again. "Better slow it down," he called. "We're dropping pretty fast." The rockets droned louder for a ' moment, and the screen markings ceased to spread. Alaia risked a quick glance at Faron". "What kind of country down there?" "Hilly," he said, then glanced at the scope and touched it. "This place right here looks like a valley. Fairly flat." She nodded and touched the controls lightly. The marking crept slowly under the crosshairs, then stopped. The descent began again. Sahl saw that her only yardstick of velocity lay in the seeping spread of the markings on the scope. She occasionally glanced at the acceleration balance, but her eyes turned quickly back to the screen. Faron had returned to the power room. quickly about the controls as the spread became more rapid. She muttered through gritted teeth. Sahl braced himself and waited. Faron was shouting from the power room, but the roar made his voice unintelligible. "See what's the matter with him!" she snapped suddenly. "I'll hold us right here." The roar increased slightly as she nudged the thrust control, and the spread ofthe marking slowed to a halt. Faron was mopping his face on his sleeve as Sahl entered the power room. "About to go down in a gorge!" he shouted. "She's got to move it over some." Sahl glanced at the transparent port, saw nothing but grayness beyond it. "What's that?" "Smoke. Our jets touched off the vegetation. We're about a hundred yards up. No use watching any more. I'll try to guide her in." They hurried back to the control cabin. Faron traced a finger lightly along a dark marking on the scope. "Deep cut," he told her. "Move it over here." The scenery began to crawl. "Say when!" she called. "Take it slow -- all right, now!" "Check. Brace yourselves. We're going in."  Seconds later, a series of muffled tearing sounds echoed through the ship. Then a settling jar. She killed the jets. "Down!" gasped Faron, sitting up. "Watch out!" Alaia screamed Suddenly. "We're going over!" The room began to tilt, first slowly, then gathering impetus. Sahl scrambled toward the down-going wall. A thunderous roar. A bonecrushing jolt. A body slammed against him hard, and the wind #l went out of him. The room spun crazily, and the jolts continued, as if they were rolling down a hill. His head slapped hard against the wall. Awareness faded. The jolting had stopped. Apparently he had blacked out for only a few seconds, for Alaia was still untangling herself from him when he shook the fog away. "Sorry, Sahl," she muttered. "I didn't mean to use you for a crash pad. You just got in the way." self sitting on the dead Eridan ian, and arose to stand on the slightly inclined wall. Faron lay groaning in the corner. "Nice landing," Sahl breathed, and meant it. "Faron's hurt!" she gasped, bending over him. "His leg! It's all -- " Sahl knelt to take a look. "Broken," he muttered, then began splitting the fabric of his suit. "Broken femur." He shook his head and reached for the Eridanian's crystal gun. "No!" the girl protested, knocking his hand away. He glowered at her. "Rather listen to him scream while I splint it?" "But -- " "It didn't kill you, did it?"  "All right, but -- if he's unconscious -- he can't -- " He looked at her sourly. "Can't come trotting along with us?" He held the gun close to Faron's shoulder, pressed the firing switch, and waited for the groans to stop. Then he brushed away the crystals that remained halfimbedded in his skin. "Go find me something long and straight for a splint," he grunted, and began ripping Faron's suit into strips. She came back after a few minutes, empty-handed. "All I found was a long metal rod, but it must weigh thirty pounds. He's heavy enough as it is." He gazed at her quietly. "You planning to carry him, Ala?" She sucked in a short breath. "Why, I -- " "Get the rod, if you want it splinted." She hesitated, then went back to get it. "We're hanging over the edge of a bluff. It's a wonder we didn't roll into it," she called. "Let's have the rod." She gave it to him, then watched as he packed one end of it under Faron's arm, then bound it to his body from the chest down. Gradually it seemed to dawn on her that Faron wasn't going any place. "Pull this tight and tie it when the fracture pops in place," he muttered, then sat down to stretch the limb against the writhing knot of muscles. There was a dull snapping sound, "Tie it!" he grunted. Minutes later, Sahl arose panting. "It may not be properly set, but that'll keep it from compounding, anyhow. Let's go." She shook her head slowly. "I'm not going anywhere." He frowned sharply. "Listen! It's certain that someone spotted our landing. It's equally certain that we can't move Faron, and that they'll get him anyway. Your presence w'on't help him a damn bit." "I can't just desert him!" "If you don't, you'll be deserting a hundred and twenty others." "I don't see how -- " "We came down here to look around, get information, and get it back to the Ark. I don't know how we can accomplish it now, but I know we can't do it just sitting here waiting to be captured. They're probably on their way here now. Come on, let's get moving." She looked down at Faron and bit her lip. "All right. I'll come," she said hoarsely. "But Sahl, I hate your guts." the low hillside about the ship. By their light, he could see that they had landed in what appeared to be a garden, or an orchard. The sun had set, and only a trace of twilight lingered in the west. A faint breeze washed the hillside and whispered in the foliage of the shrub-like trees. The breeze brought pleasant odors: a wisp of smoke, the smell of moldering leaves, a faint perfume from the trees. Despite the danger, they paused a moment savoring the feel of mossy earth under their feet. "Thirteen years," Alaia kept murmuring, "thirteen long years." The "orchard" was cool and pleasant, the trees shaped like inverted hearts, with the foliage draped from the branches like tassels. They reminded Sahl of weeping willows, except for their nearperfect symmetry. It was indeed a garden world -- and old, old and carefully tended. She caught his arm suddenly. "Sahl! Lights moving in the sky! Up there!" He gazed in the direction she pointed and saw them. The breeze brought the faint drone of engines. Circling aircraft. He moistened his lips nervously and hesitated. "Probably sent to spot the rocket. But they can't land here, not unless they do it the same way you did." "Yes, but they'll guide a ground party to us." He nodded and walked to the rim of the gorge. A hundred feet down to the rush of water over rocks. The moon was rising, and by its faint light he saw the dim whiteness of a small waterfall. "Let's go," he grunted, and began trotting toward higher ground, following the lip of the cliff a dozen yards on their right. "Where to?" she called from behind. "How should I know? Anywhere, away from that rocket. We'll stay on the crest of the ridge. It seems to follow the gorge. Down there might be a good place to hide, if we have to." "This moss is too soft. Sahl, we're leaving a clear trail." "I know it, but I hope they won't find it before morning." "Those lights. They're circling lower. They've seen the fires." a "Yeah. Save your breath for running." The crest of the ridge steepened and angled away from the gorge and led them tt a steep hill that arose on their left. They scrambled up a series of rocky ledges to a rain-guttered slope that was free of the moss. Regular patches of brush lay ahead. Alaia pleaded exhaustion and they paused to rest.  "We must have run ten miles," she panted. "Closer to four, maybe," he muttered, staring back at the orange etching of glowing embers on the hillside where they had landed. "Sahl, look! Down the gorge toward the valley!" "Uh -- yes, lights. A whole swarm of them. And they're moving."  "Torches?" "I don't think so. They -- they move too fast. And they're too white for flame." They fell silent for a moment. "I don't hear anything. No engines." "Too far away, maybe." "The wind's right. But -- look! They're flying. Close to the ground, but they're flying." "Come on," he muttered, "we'd better be moving." They climbed again, and as the brush thickened a moon-splashed cliff loomed ahead. They made for it, tearing through the brush and stumbling over the rocky ground. "That cliff," Sahl muttered"Looks like a mesa up there, or a high plateau." "What good is it? Why do we keep climbing?" "To get a view of the land. So that if we last through tomorrow, we'll see where to go." "Sahl! Those lights. They've split up back by the rocket." He paused to follow her gaze, then tugged her on. "Part of them coming this way. Hurry!" "But where?" she gasped as she ran. "The cliff's got an overhang. We'll get under it." "The lights -- they wink on and off -- like signals. And they swarm around like wasps." "Gome on!" he snapped. "You can watch them from under the overhang." Theysprinted across a clearing, then ran along the foot of the cliff until they reached a gulley where the rock hung like a jaw over thy ground. They crawled quickly back into the blackest shadows of the recess and sat panting on the moist rocks. "Nice place for something big and stealthy and hungry to hang' out," she said with a shiver in her voice. "Maybe. But I doubt if there's anything like that left on this planet." He paused, and his voice changed slightly. "Nothing, that is, except us." He heard her moisten her lips in the darkness, as if to speak, but she said nothing. Peering out at the night he caught a glimpse of the winking lights, momentarily visible beyond a dip in the ridge. "They must have picked up our trail all right," he muttered. "Let's hope they lose it where the mossy ground ends." "What are they?" "I don't know but -- they're getting closer. Listen!" "I don't hear... She paused, then: "Yes, I do -- faintly. It's a whirring sound, like wings, like quail flying. A whole big covey of quail." "That's what it is," he whispered. "Wings." He crawled closer toward the opening and stared. "Fireflies. Giant fireflies, Ala -- only they're probably nothing like fireflies except that they glow. Listen to those wings! And they light up a whole patch of hillside." "Coming this way?" "They're circling. Must have lost us." She laughed suddenly. "Fireflies, chasing humans. It's funny -- " "Don't get hysterical, Ala!" "It's really funny," she went on. "All the quaint little life-forms, out to hunt us down. Watch out for the rabbits, Sahl! Beware of the sparrow patrol! They work in packs. I wonder what the fireflies are leading. A band of gophers? A flock of snakes?" She laughed again, but choked it off in a hiss and a shiver. "You're not far from wrong," he muttered. "They are leading something. There's lots of rustling in the brush. But -- I think they're heading the wrong way." "Intelligent fireflies -- what next?" "Not intelligent, I'd guess. Just under control. Like a dog-pack." "Under whose control? The little fat-heads?" "Remotely, I imagine. I wouldn't be surprised but what every lifeform on the planet is controlled. The fellow we communicated with on the ship said as much. Or hinted at it." She was silent for a moment. "Have the lights gone away?" to the open and stared. "They're swarming up the cliff, about half-a-mile away -- up to the top of the mesa. I guess they think we went..." "What's wrong?" "Nothing. I just happened to think: if they suspect we took that way, then there must be a path up the cliff down there -- or some reason why they think we'd want to climb it. Both, maybe." "So?" "So maybe we should, if we get a chance." "Sahl -- I'm too tired to move." "Sleep awhile, if you can. I'll watch." She murmured gratefully, and he heard her shifting around on the loose rock, seeking a place to stretch out. Suddenly she giggled. "Something crawled down my back. I -- " Then she choked out a yelp. "Sahl, help me! It stings, and I can't reach it." With a worried grunt he crawled back to where she lay, trying to claw at something between her shoulder-blades. He slipped his hand down the neck of her suit and felt along the smooth skin until he found it -- a rough scaly little disk that clung tight to her back. He pinched it hard and jerked. She whimpered as the thing came free. Sahl struck a light and studied it briefly -- a leathery creature with wiry tendrils that moved very slowly, as if groping for the hold they had lost. His face remained expressionless. "What is it?" she asked. "Nothing much," he grunted. He laid it on a rock and burned it. It wasn't much, as it stood -- but he had seen the mature one with the pale green fruit, growing with its roots buried deep in the flesh of a man. "Better sleep up closer to the front," he advised. The moon rose higher in the starflecked sky, and hff watched the quiet land with its orderly patterns of vegetation, and the winking lights that circled slowly over it. The orderliness implied ownership. Here was no primitive forest waiting for the axe and the plough. Here was no place for a colony. He glanced at the lurid disk of the moon and tried to pick out the landing site where over a hundred humans waited and watched. In vain. No, they would not turn back, would not spend the long years required for the journey home. They would come down here eventually. And when they came, what would be their role in the scheme of the world? Servants? Or merely an organ in the biologic corporation the native Eridanians were building? the breeze, voices and the rustle of brush. He frowned, brought out his gun, and stretched out on his stomach to wait. The search was continuing. Peering carefully, he finally spotted them a hundred yards away. A dozen of the saffronskinned manlike creatures were beating about in the brush and talking among themselves. The language seemed monosyllabic and primitive, but somehow human, designed for the acoustics of the human throat. Sahl felt certain that they were not locally evolved, but rather had descended from primitive Earthlings, captured by the Eridanian space-wanderers during their day of expansion. How long ago? Judging by their bone structure, he guessed it to be' at least fifty thousand years. Mutations had occurred, of course ; their coloring and their loss of hair had undoubtedly come about since their departure from Earth. Also their ability to commune telepathically with the Eridanian species. The latter specialization seemed to suggest forced breeding. The searchers were wandering closer. They seemed to carry no weapons except staves, and their only source of light was the moon. Since they spoke among themselves, he guessed that they were free agents rather than telepathicallycontrolled creatures such as the ones they had encountered on the ship. Sahl retreated deeper into the recess. The party reached clear ground fifty yards down the cliff, then turned and wandered toward the place where the' fugitives lay hidden. He quickly searched through the pockets of Alaia's suit and found the crystal gun, which seemed preferable to the more lethal automatic, in case they were ch 'covered. The party paused occasionally to prod under the edge of the cliff with their staves. Didn't they realize that the Earthlings were armed? That numbers were no match for guns? of laughter from the group, then a sudden shriek -- a woman's voice, raised in clamoring protest. He frowned. There had been no woman among the searchers. He stole closer for a look. A short, thick female was struggling to escape them, but they pinned her arms behind her and held her fast. He suddenly heard the screech of an infant among the babble of voices. One of the men held the baby under his arm, and the woman fought frantically to get it back. Suddenly Sahl understood. The men had not been searching for the Earthlings, but for the woman and her child. The mall drama was breaking up. They dragged the howling female down the hill. The fellow with the baby set out in another direction -- along the foot of the cliff toward the place where the winking lights had swarmed up its side. He thought for a moment of following, but decided to wait. There were still signs of activity in the area about the damaged rocket, and certainly the search was continuing, probably along the gorge. He was puzzled by the incident he had just witnessed. It seemed to have an ominous significance, but he could not interpret it. Did the child's capture in some way involve the motives of the Eridanian race? Or had the woman merely stolen a child that was not her own? He stiffened suddenly, hearing a sound in the distance. Had he imagined it, or did a voice call his name -- a booming voice that rolled across the hills. It came again, swelling louder with a change in the breeze. "Morgun Sahl. Alaia Dazille!" He lay frozen for a moment. A giant loudspeaker calling to them. Echoes rang and reverberated among the hills. Was it Faron, captured by the master-creatures, and responding to their bidding? But the voice seemed mechanical, and he remembered the translator unit aboard the rocket. Undoubtedly the language structure was still set up in its memory circuits and recording units. They had only to feed its output into a large amplifier. "Welcome! Welcome! Sahl and Dazille, Welcome!' I Perhaps it resulted from a malfunction of the translator. Or perhaps it was a trick. He wondered how much insight they had gained into human psychology. Or were they interpreting it in terms of their almost sub-human servants with the saffron hides? He shook Alaia awake, and she sat up muttering sleepily. Then she clutched his arm as the voice resumed. # " Welcome , wanderers!" A pause to let the echoes die. " You are free to roam and observe ,... You will not be harmed..." "What's going on?" Alaia whispered in fright. "Shhh! Listen!" ",... as long as you harm no one else... We shall wait until you feel the need to cooperate with us... Meanwhile, lest you think of violence, remember that we hold Faron Qun a hostage." The voice fell silent. The echoes died. "Free to roam!" Alaia repeated. "Did we misjudge them?" "I hadn't realized that we'd made a judgement," he murmured sourly. "Then why run? Why hide?" "Because we didn't know how they'd react to the seizure of their on board. We still don't know." "I've got the feeling we're trapped," she murmured. "We are. We can't contact the Ark or get back to it without their help. We don't dare trust them. And I can't see how they dare trust us. To them, we're a couple of wolves -- wandering in their flocks." "They've  got Faron," she reminded him. He hesitated, then spoke softly: "Listen, Ala -- the three of us are expendable. We have to be, for the hope of the colony. If you don't agree, then we'd better part company -- and you can head for the nearest city." "I -- I know, Sahl. Of course we're expendable, but -- " "Then we can't think of Faron as a debit. If he has to be spent, then we'll spend him. If you can't agree, you'd better go. If you feel he's a club over your head, then you'd better go look for our hosts -- and 'cooperate', as they put it." "I -- " She started to speak, but fell silent. Her breathing became labored. "I hate you." Her voice was violent. "That's beside the point," he said coldly. "It doesn't give an answer." Another silence, then : "All right. All right." He nodded in the darkness. "I doubt if they'll harm him, no matter what we do." "Why not?" "They want us for something. And I have an idea what it is. No, don't ask me yet -- because I'm far from being certain, and I don't want us to act on guesswork." with a start, having fallen asleep during the night. He touched Alaia's arm and she stirred, then sat up to rub drowsy eyes. He crawled to the opening and stared across the hilltops and beyond them toward a plain. The orange sun spread a lurid light over the landscape, fully revealing its features to them for the first time. A moss-draped world, hoary with age. No .vivid colors splashed its gray-stained spread of vegetation, no riotous growth, nbr any tangle of plants seeking sunlight in a frantic competition. It was a restrained world of dusty greens, drab browns, silvery grays. The hills and the valley were covered with evenly spaced trees, and the moss blanket lay soft over the ground between. Perhaps ten miles away on the plain nestled a patch of white buildings. He looked further and saw others like them -- small villages scattered across the valley nestled beside the creeks in nests of trees. And the inhabitants? "It looks like a painting," Alaia murmured beside him. "It is," he grunted, "but the pigment is protoplasm. Nature's been changed into an art-form -- or a system of slavery, depending on how you look at it, and from which side of the fence." "Reminds me of pictures I've seen of Japanese landscapes." "Yeah, Earth might look like this someday. With one difference." "What's that?" "It'll belong to Man." "And here?" "We'll just fit in somewhere. Or else we won't fit in at all. We won't be at the top." "Maybe someday -- " . "No, Ala. If this is as carefully a tailored biologic system as I think, it's designed to serve one species -- the one that developed it. Thinking that Man could supplant the designers of it is like expecting a whale's brain to function in the body of an elephant." "What hope is there, then?" "That maybe we can live here as predators -- or at least as non-par-, ticipants. We brought tons of seeds from Earthplants, and the small animals, of course. If we could get established on an island continent -- " He stopped suddenly. "What's wrong?" "Seeds," he muttered. "Seeds. Vegetables of course, but also -- clover and Johnson grass, oaks and pecans and pines, even sagebrush and cactus. Not to mention the rabbits and white rats." "I don't understand." "Never mind, let's just look around. There's no one in sight," under the cliff face and paused for a moment. A few winged creatures circled lazily in the sky. A tendril that grew from a fissure in the rock seemed to sense their presence, and began curling back away from them at perhaps an inch a minute. A ball of fur hung in a nearby shrub, dangling by a single tentacle that was coiled about a branch. It opened a single eye and blinked at them. Then it snaked out another tentacle, caught at a neighboring shrub, and began swinging away -- hand over hand. Alaia shuddered. "I'm starving, but what'll we eat?" He brought out a single stick of protein dehydrate and broke it in half. "We'll have to wait and see what the saffrons eat. We don't dare experiment. Come on. Let's walk." They hurried along the foot of the cliff toward the place where the flying lights had ascended. They cast nervous glances toward the hills, and all about them. "I keep feeling like something's watching us," she breathed. "It's possible," he gfunted. "That fur ball with one eye, for instance. Or the trees. The birds. Which creatures are semi-intelligent? Which communicate among themselves, or with the dominant race? We don't have a way of knowing." "Sahl, what are we looking for? It seems so hopeless?" "We're looking for weak spots, for sensitive points. There's one thing about an integrated system, a system of interdependencies: if some key member of it gets out of whack, the whole thing goes to pot. Like mechanical civilization, for instance; deny it any one of a dozen key materials and it starts falling to pieces." "Even if we found it, how could we do anything about it?" He chuckled grimly. "We won't -- in anything less than a lifetime. You didn't expect anything else, did you?" She shook her head. "I didn't expect it to be easy, no." She paused, staring ahead. "What's that up there, where the rock juts out?" "It's -- " they moved ahead a few paces. " -- a ladder, I think. Iron rungs, set in the rock." His eyes followed them up, but the face of the cliff sloped back out of sight. He trotted out toward the brush, seeking a better vantage point. He stood there for a time, gazing at the clifftop two hundred feet above them. "What is it?" she called in a low voice. "A wall," he answered. "A high wall along the top of the cliff." He looked around quickly, as if fearing an eavesdropper, then called, "Come on out here." As she approached, he handed her the gun. "I'm going to climb it, Ala. Cover me. I want a look at what's on the mesa." She took the gun and made a wry mouth. "You'll be a perfect target up there whether I cover you or not." He nodded. "I know -- but I'm beginning to believe what they said, about leaving us free to roam awhile. Surely they could have taken us before now if they wanted began climbing slowly. But the rungs seemed to be about three and a half feet apart, making the climb something of a struggle. Standing on the first rung, and clutching the second at the level of his waist, he could just comfortably reach the third. A person of less than adult stature could not have climbed the ladder. Why the wide spacing, he wondered? Halfway up, he froze. The loudspeaker had thundered a single word from over the hills: "Wait!" And the echoes said, "wait... wait... ait... He hung there motionless for a moment, listening. A perfect target indeed! A helpless speck on the Crag. They wouldn't even have to inflict a lethal wound. If he were winged, the drop to the rocks would kill him. "If we meant to destroy you" boomed the voice, "now would be the time." He waited. "Wouldn't .it?" demanded the smug watchers. He gingerly went back down one rung. "Hut you are free to continue upward , or to descend, as you choose." A moment of indecision. He looked back at Alaia. She stood very still, eyes sweeping along the clifftop. He set his jaw and began climbing again. "Do not molest the young ones" warned the distant voice, "nor their nurses." # The warning made him catch his breath. Young ones? Were they letting him wander into a place where the Eridanians spawned their young? If so, he decided that they were making a serious mistake. But as he continued the climb, a faint babble of voices reached his ears -- childish shrieks and laughter and gibberish. Human voices, or those of the saffron primates. He scrambled up the last step and stood in a narrow pathway that ran along the eight-foot wall, overhung here and there by the drapery of foliage. He stood on a rock, leaped for a hand-hold, and pulled himself up. He looked over into what seemed to be a shady garden or park. He caught a glimpse of two orange-tinted children toddling across the moss-covered turf. They vanished among the trees, but he heard the wailing of infants, and the shouting of the young. Puzzled, he sat on the wall and beckoned to Alaia. She came forward and labored through the same as he had. ing the reason for the wide spacing: so that the children could not escape. He looked quickly back toward the villages on the plain, remembered the incident of the woman and her child. The searchers had led her back in the general direction of the villages, but they had obviously taken the child up here. Why? Alaia's frightened face came into view. "I never felt so helpless," she gasped as he helped her up to the top of the wall. She regained her breath and listened to the sounds in the park. "Children. Lots of them. What is this?" "Let's find out." He leaped down to the mossy turf and caught her arm as she followed. They moved a few yards deeper into the trees, then stopped suddenly. A buxom saffron female lay nude on the soft moss, sprawled listlessly on her back with her eyes closed. Two toddlers nursed hungrily at her large breasts. One looked up to peer at the intruders with his large brown eyes, but did not interrupt his meal. They moved quietly on through the cool shade, encountered several similar scenes. "Wet nurses," he breathed. "Not mothers?" "Doubt it. Saw one little fellow trade nannies back there." Occasionally one of the nurses moved listlessly to gaze at them with empty eyes, only to fall back lazily to a more comfortable position without showing any real curiosity. "It's horrible!" Alaia shuddered. "They're all idiots." "Highly specialized breeding, probably. I imagine they're a distinct sub-species. Contented cattle, as opposed to the yoke oxen."  She murmured a protest. They moved on. The park was a garden spot, overgrown with fruit-bearing trees and vines. Alaia plucked a pulpy, pink-skinned fruit, but he caught her hand on its way to her mouth. "It .must be all right," she said. "I saw a nurse eating one." He hesitated, then let her take a bite. "Good!" she smiled. "I'll wait, thanks. If you put on a blank look and start nursing babies, then I'll know." She sputtered and spat and tossed the rest of it away. "Go to hell!" she snapped, reddening furiously. They came to a low wall and looked over it into another section of the nursery park. There were children of a higher age group, but v no wet nurses. He caught sight of a saffron adult wandering among the trees -- a man. "Two to three-year-olds, Sahl. What is this place?" "Stockyard, I think. Come on, let's see the whole thing." Chapter IX about five square miles of land, and Sahl estimated that the park contained approximately four thousand children, ranging in age from a few weeks to eight years. No. one molested them as they wandered, although the cold, objective stares of the supervisors made him feel somehow that they were control units of Eridanian masters. Indeed, the older children themselves seemed occasionally to move and gaze with a solemnity that was somehow unchildlike. He saw one incident that he could only interpret as a release-shock phenomenon. The child, an eight-year-old, stood gravely by the wall at the far end of the enclosure, hands folded behind his back, feet spread slightly, head erect. He watched them with adult-seeing eyes, quietly observing a disinterested and interpretive silence. As Sahl crouched and leaped to pluck a fruit, the child's eyes seemed to measure the height of the jump, and he nodded slightly to himself. After they had passed, Sahl glanced back. The child had slumped to the ground, was clutching his head in his hands and moaning. A look of idiocy had spread across his face. The biologist remembered the reaction of the ship's crew to the death of the master, and he pursed his lips thoughtfully. Alaia touched his arm suddenly. "Look -- a stone building, there in the trees. It's covered with vines." "First one we've seen," he anurmured, coming to a halt. "Unless you count the unwalled rain-shelters. Let's have a closer look." They wandered closer, but Sahl suddenly drew his gun and stiffened. "What's wrong? What do you see?" "Notice the door. Five feet tall, no more. Not built for human convenience." "Look what's hanging over it." "One of the fur balls, like the thing we saw in the brush." T hey advanced slowly. The creature hung by a tentacle from a peg set in the wall. The other tentacle was coiled about a half devoured fruit that it had plucked from the vines. The single eye surveyed their approach unwinkingly. Suddenly it set the fruit on a small ledge over the door and thrust the tentacle through a small hole in the wall just beneath the ledge. The tentacle seemed to writhe for a moment, then withdrew and picked up the fruit again. "Sahl, I heard a chime ring just then. Inside the building." "So did I. The little fellow up there is apparently a doorman." She stared at it for a moment, "It might be quaint, if I weren't so scared." "Quaint? Mmmm -- which is more advanced: a photoelectric warning rig, or a biomechanism whose only purpose in life is to do a task like that?" "Rhetorical question. Shall we try the door." "Why? It looks like it's opening for us." They stopped a few feet away, guns ready, gazing into what appeared to be an empty anteroom. "What opened it?" "We'll find out." Sahl thrust his head gingerly inside, glanced around quickly, then withdrew it. "Another fur ball," he muttered, "hanging on the inside wall. Some system." "You are invited to enter," called a voice from inside the building. "Sahl, there's one of them in there !" "Maybe." He hesitated for a long moment, then shrugged. "We might as well go in, but keep that crystalgun ready." They stepped cautiously into the anteroom. The door swung slowly closed behind them. Light came from openings along the top of the wall. The ceiling nearly brushed the top of Sahl's head, touched when he stood on tiptoe. They faced an opposing door, but it remained closed. Briefly, he wondered if they had walked into a trap. "If you will replace your weapons in your clothing, we shall permit you to pass. We cannot trust your impulsiveness "They are in there," he conceded to Alaia. "Well, what next?" He paused, then spoke to the voice. "I'll put my automatic away, but we won't give up the anaesthetic weapon." The voice hesitated, then: "Agreed. But I advise you against its use." for them, and they approached slowly. Another room beyond it, this one richly furnished. The Eridanian sat on a softly padded couch, facing them with a calm, piercing gaze. Two eight-year-olds flanked him. Their weapons, and their' coldly adult expressions, told Sahl that they were telecontrolled by the Eridanian. All remained motionless for a few seconds, and Sahl's eyes quickly swept the room. A young girl lay sleeping on a pallet, one of the parasite creatures rooted in her back. Twisted plants with fat protuberances grew in urns at each end of the Eridanian's couch. Similar parasites, with their paleskinned fruit, grew tangled with the plants rooted in the protuberances. Sahl suppressed an exclamation of disgust. "Our feeding method disturbs you," came the voice from an opening in the wall behind the Eridanian's couch. "The process is biologically favorable, however. There are virtually no waste products in the milk of the wretr; hence, our digestive organs are much simpler and less subject to disturbance than your own. Your disgust is a primitive reaction." "I wasn't aware than I had expressed it," he growled. "I perceive it," said the Eridanian, through the mechanical voice. "You have not been bred for telepathetic aptitude, nor conditioned for it, but I can easily perceive your overall semantic state." Sahl looked around again. "How did you get the translator up here without us noticing it?" "We did not. It was taken to the nearest city. A... uh... saffron lies in the next room, responding in his own language to my statements. His voice is being transmitted to the city by radio and fed into the translator. The translation is rebroadcast to this station. That is what you hear. The method seems complicated, but within a few days we shall have conditioned our saffrons -- several of them -- to speak your tongue." Sahl frowned thoughtfully."What frequencies -- " The creature on the couch seemed to purr, and Sahl somehow felt that it was a chuckle. "You ask that, wondering if the signals are being picked up by your ship on our moon. That is very probable. We established communication with Wolek Pam as soon as we picked up the translator with its language-content. We have nothing to hide. I might mention that your leader seemed moke disturbed by the death of our emissary than we have been." "You aren't disturbed?" Sahl asked coldly. "It was unfortunate," the creature conceded, "but we do not share your view of death. When a Piszjil -- as the sub-species calls us -- dies, he does not die in the same sense that you would understand. Because of telepathetic resonance conditions, the Piszjil focus of consciousness is not sharply limited to a single individual, but is to a certain extent distributed." "A racial consciousness?" "Not quite. I have a distinct personality, and the body you see is its central point. But It extends also to all of my kind within approximately a ten-mile radius. If you were to destroy me, my memories and thought-patterns and feelings would still live in the others. We are bom as distinct individuals, you see, but as we grow older we become composite personalities, and even centuries after, death, some trace of awareness remains in others of our kind. Eventually, for all practical purposes, the individual ego dies out, or is subsumed by others -- but there is no sharply defined death." and stared down at the small man-thing. The two guards swung their weapons toward her quietly. "For what are you going to use these children here on the mesa?" she demanded in a voice full of restrained hate. The Piszjil blinked at her once with semi-transparent lids that covered yellow eyes with black slits for pupils. He drew a robe of pale green gauze more closely about his shoulders and studied her quietly before speaking. "If your feelings become overt," he warned, "I shall have to anaesthetize you. Your question is an aggressive demand, but I shall answer nevertheless. The children are brought here at birth from the free villages on the plain -- " "Free?" Sahl interrupted. "Yes. Theirs is a folk society, and quite fixed in cultural form. We do not interfere with their lives, except to levy a certain percentage of the birth rate, which is quite high. The percentage of males we take is such that the male-female ratio in the adult population of the villages remains one to seven." "Seven wives apiece, eh?" The Piszjil paused. "Their mating customs are rather free, but it works out about like that, usually.' We make an occasional census, and it varies only slightly from year to year. They bring the children to us of their own accord. It is a religious ceremony for them, since they attach a sacredness to our race. The mother frequently objects, but the children that they keep are raised communally, and she soon transfers her affection to others, The priests bring our levy to us here at regular intervals," "You haven't answered my question!" Alaia snapped. The Piszjil ignored her, and continued: "You have seen the park, but have not understood its significance. This building is the center of influence. There are other rooms where Tutors sit in trance, continually exerting an effort to establish liaison with the growing children. It is established gradually at first, then reaches a sudden strongness of response at about eight years. When the liaison is perfectly achieved -- if it is -- the children are ready to leave the park." "And if it isn't achieved?" "There are failures, of course," said the Piszjil, gesturing with a fragile hand toward the girl who slept on the pallet, with the parasite rooted in her back. "But they are useful. The wretr's milk differs according to the nature of the host. Some hosts are vegetable, some animal. It provides a variety of diet -- " "Beast!" A sudden scream of rage from Alaia. Sahl caught at her arms to restrain her, but she savagely tore herself free and darted toward the Piszjir s couch with obviously murderous intent. The weapons of the child-guards coughed togetherShe staggered a few steps, then crumpled with a sob at the foot of the couch. Sahl had crouched and drawn his automatic. The child-guards kept their weapons trained on him, but did not fire. The Piszjil watched him without change of expression. "In our cooperative world," it said slowly, "we have found lethal weapons unnecessary for many thousands of years. We are certainly capable of manufacturing them in a very short time, however." The toneless voice seemed to contain a threat. Sahl straightened quietly and lowered the weapon, but kept it in hand. His scalp was bristling, and he fought an urge to kill the thing immediately. "In fact," the Piszjil continued, "since the coming of your ship, we have assembled three rockets, wellarmed and capable of destroying your Ark. Modify your behavior accordingly." Chapter X almost as if there had been no interruption. Alaia lay unconscious before the creature's couch, and Sahl watched her breathing. Her presence had become a handicap, for he could neither run nor fight as long as she lay helpless. He remembered his own words about the possibility of spending Faron, and suddenly wondered if they had not sprung from an unconscious wish to see the chemist dead. He realized vaguely that he was attracted to Alaia, who was obviously devoted to Faron. "We inform you of conditions as they exist, 'you see," the Piszjil was saying. "Understandably, your people will be horrified for a time. On the other hand, you must understand our position. Our ancestors brought specimens of the highest life-form on your planet at the time." It gestured toward the childguards. "You have' a common ancestry with them, but at tne time of capture they were scarcely more than apes. Their language consisted of perhaps two hundred words. They used fire when they 'found it; clubs and levers and sharp sticks their only tools. "To us, they were only animals, potentially useful. We bred them selectively, weeding out the ferocious, saving the placid, the clever, the telepathically apt. The hairlessness was a concession to the beauty-standards of our more egocentric ancestors. Look at them, Morgun Sahl. Your rather distant cousins -- human, I think, but different in that they lack your aggressiveness and egotism. Their development has paralleled your own in some respects, in others it has differed. They belong to us now, by their own wish. Does it still horrify you?" Sahl remained silent, knowing that the Piszjil could feel the flood of suppressed anger about him. "As for this park," the creature went on, "we regard it as philanthropic. Our own young reach maturity in similar gardens on other tablelands. That should convey to you that we do not see our relationship with the sub-species as one of ruthless exploitation." Be kind to your dog, Sahl thought bitterly, then stared at the Piszjil with sudden interest. "You are mammals?" he asked. The yellow eyes narrowed slightly, and the Piszjil paused, as if sensing Sahl's shift in mood from frustrated anger to cautious interest. "No, we oviposit our young -- in a symbiotic relationship with another species." "I don't understand." then lifted a slender arm, closed its eyes, and seemed to be in communication with some unseen person. A shutter clicked behind him, and a picture flashed into projection on the wall over the couch. It revealed a short, waddling creature with fat legs and a small head and a fat spherical body. Somehow, it reminded Sahl of a plucked chicken. "A drulrul," the Piszjil said. "An egg-bearer. After fertilization, our eggs are transferred to these creatures to await birth." It paused to purr amusement. "An advantageous system for the females of our race." "Yeah. Complete emancipation for women. I know some people who'd think it a great idea." The scene shifted slowly, scanning over a waddling herd of the egg-carriers, then backing away for a view of the whole mesa. It appeared similar to the garden of children, except that a slender pylon arose in th.e center, marking it for what it was. The projection vanished suddenly. "We have nothing to withhold, you see," the creature said. "Your species is intelligent enough to find out for itself eventually. So we will answer your questions honestly." "Then suppose you tell us what you intend to do about our colony." floor. "And you as well. A small beginning, perhaps, but if we have to destroy the ship... He seemed to shrug. Sahl's face went expressionless. "We're prisoners? You said -- " A long, quavering purr -- and the creature's lips spread in what could only be the equivalent of mocking laughter. and shot it through the braincase. It looked startled, and its fangs flicked out full length. He shot it again in the belly. The child-guards went into shock. One of them shrieked. A weapon coughed behind him, and crystals stung his neck. His final impression of his surroundings was a blurred perception of the couch's motion. It was bleeding where the bullet had entered it after passing through the master's body. It lifted a small, rodent-like head which had been retracted, turtle-fashion. It squealed with pain and started staggering toward Sahl on short thick legs. Dimly, he saw that it meant to attack him. But it was. badly wounded. It managed to collapse on top of him, then died. The breath, and the awareness, went out of him. Chapter XI derful?" "Who is this? Who's talking? I can't see you." "Of course you can't. We're talking by wire. This is Faron or, as my wives call me, Faroon. Isn't it beautiful here?" "What are you talking about?" Sahl growled weakly as he lay on something soft and stared at a. bluelighted ceiling. The chemist laughed heartily. "The planet! The scenery! The people! And -- the Piszjil!" He paused, and his voice went reverent. "Yes, especially the Piszjil !" "What's wrong with you?" The biologist trembled with anger. "You crazy or something? Where's Alaia? Where are you? And how did I get here?" "Don't you know?" Faron called enthusiastically. "Aren't you aware ? Oh, but diey'll help you be aware, really aware. Of purpose, Sahl! Of high purpose!" "Yeah?" , y "Yes! I'm in a village, Sahl! A dozen beautiful wives! Wonderful, wonderful, everything's wonderful!" "That's nice." He hesitated, feeling something tie a knot in his stomach. "Where's Alaia?" "Who?" "Alaia, Alaia!" he barked. "A-LA-I-A. Where is she? What's wrong? Have you completely lost your mind?" "Who?" Faron's voice was baffled. Sahl shivered violently. "The girl you were probably going to marry, you maniac! What's wrong with you?" "Nothing! Nothing ever!" The chemist giggled. "Marry? I'm married a dozen times." Sahl licked his lips, found himself panting. "Faron! Are you drugged? Doped? Or just insane? What day is it? Is the Ark all right?" There was a long pause, then : "I think it's you that's out of your head, Sahl. Ark? What do you mean by 'Ark'? Noah's Ark? Arc of a circle? Say -- you give me the creeps! So long, fellow!" A sharp click. "Hello! Hello!" he bellowed. "Hello!" said quite another voice, one that was in the room. He rolled his head and stared at a saffron servant who sat impassively in the corner, arms folded across his chest, eyes closed. Automaton, he realized, a control unit. "Well?" he demanded. "I am the Piszjil, Fyff, sem anticist and psycho-logician. I am not in the room with you; no need to look." "What's going on?" "Your memory has been blanked for the past eight days. How do you feel?" "Weak." "A result of the conditioning process, perhaps. You experienced considerable pain." "I was talking to Faron Qun. What happened?" "The conversation with him was arranged as a demonstration for you. He was subjected to our conditioning methods, and the experiment was a complete success. He has been stripped of large patches of memory. He thinks he is still on F.arth somewhere. He is confused, of course, by the blank-spots, but we Riled them in with pseudo memories. lie was an easy subject." his face. His lips twisted, but the curse wilted in his throat. Suddenly his voice was gone. He gasped and strangled, and struggled against his bonds. Dizziness, exhaustion, then nausea that left him drained. Slowly he relaxed, slowly the rage drained away. Then he lifted his hands easily to his face. There were no bonds! But he had felt them! The fellow in the comer made a cackling sound, possibly a response to Fyff's amusement. "With you we could not achieve complefe success. Your memory is nearly intact. You clung very stubbornly to recollections, no matter how unpleasant we managed to make them for you. Given time, we could probably succeed. But time is short, and we can use you better as you are." Another flood of anger, another choked off curse, followed by the sensation of strangulation and fear and sickness. He could not move. When at last he subsided, the fellow cackled again. "Is something wrong, Morgun Sahl?" He sucked in a slow breath and kept himself calm. "What have you done to me?" "Conditioned you against overt, aggression in any form toward our race. That, at least, was successful. You will not beble to attack, condemn, or harm a Piszjil in any way. If you persist in trying, you will only find yourself stricken by convulsion, perhaps unconsciousness." Sahl suppressed a surge of anger about to burst forth. He lay breathing heavily, too stricken to speak. "You'll also find that it's impossible for you to express an opinion that runs contrary to our wishes. You may feel it, but you can't express it. Eventually it'll probably frustrate you to such an extent that you'll have to come around to our way of thinking or go mad. The conditioning won't last forever, but by the time it dies out you'll be either a conformist or insane, like Qun." It won't last forever. It won't last forever -- his mind caught at the phrase and clung. "I wonder if most of your people hre as stubborn as you, or as flexible as Qun. We shall soon know, of course." Good, he thought, they hadn't gotten the others off the moon yet, at least. And if he knew Wolek Parn, they wouldn't manage to do it. They'd have to destroy Ark, colony and all. "What do you plan t(# do with me?" he asked aloud. "Use you as an agent to Wolek Parn." "I don't understand." "Parn remains stubborn, even though we broadcast your messages to him. He is half-convinced, but not quite. He insists on talking to you in person before he agrees to your proposals." "Messages?" he gasped. "Proposals? I didn't -- " The denial choked off into a low wheeze. Dizzyness again, and fright. Pie couldn't say it. The words refused to come, and he stammered gibberish. The spokesman cackled. "A taboo statement, Morgun Sahl." His helplessness enraged him, and the rage made the situation worse. He blacked out for a few moments. Then he lay weakly struggling to keep some sort of mental balance. "Try saying, 'I recommend that the whole colbny land on the planet without further delay.' " "I -- I -- " He swallowed hard. The statement fascinated him strangely. No harm in seeing what happens, he thought. Then he said it. "I recommend that the whole colony land..." T he reaction was immediate. A feeling of warmth, of relief, a sense of security and of relaxation spread over him. For a moment there was perfect contentment and peace. From this too he recovered gradually, and icy fear replaced it. He was beginning to see. "Is that the state of mind Faron Qun is in?" he gasped. "Yes! Precisely! Wouldn't that be pleasant?" He wanted to bellow a fierce negative, but he checked the impulse before he strangled on it. "You know my answer," he said quietly. "Indeed I know it, but you can't make it. Now, as to your task -- "I won't... Won't... uhg!... The Piszjil waited until he finished choking, then continued: "A ship will take you to the Ark. Your task is to convince Wolek Parn to send the colony down at once, in a place we'll specify. You'll perform the task, because by that time you'll be fully aware of your limitations, and awareness will actually serve to strengthen the block. You'll be consciously frightened as well as subconsciously. You can't help doing it, and you might as well face it." Sahl remained silent, fearful of another spasm. The Piszjil paused briefly, then continued slowly: "Consider this. After it's done, you'll be well rewarded. You'll have a pleasant life, in pleasant surroundings. Peace. Relative freedom. Eventually, you'll be content with it. Man, what more do you want? Why insist upon dominion?" The biologist moistened his lips. He lay staring blankly at the ceiling, refusing to speak, trying not to think. He could not risk any reaction lest it prove to be a dead-end of despair. If I blunder into too many forbidden responses, he thought. I'll really get confused. I'll save it until I get to Parn, he continued, and then I'll throw a sputtering convulsion all over his command deck. He'll know something's wrong. "Now," said iis tormentor. "Would you like to see Alaia Dazille?" He sat up quickly. "May I?" "Out the door, three rooms down the 'corridor, and down the short incline to the seats. Go ahead." "I'm not locked in?" "No. Go anywhere you like -- if you can." If you can. He had a fair idea of what would happen if he tried to e.si ape. He refused to try. He would save it all up for Wolek Parn, and then rebellion. He left the room and followed the Piszjil' s directions. Was he making a mistake? I must suppress all possibly forbidden responses, he thought, lest I make the whole situation worse. He walked down the incline and through a sound-proofed door. As soon as he opened it, he heard her scream. He froze for a moment, looking beyond the door. Nothing but a tier of seats next to a railing, and beyond the rail a pit. It reminded him of an operaing room. Somehow it looked familiar. He advanced slowly toward the rail. As Alaia's scream died, a monotonous voice echoed through the huge room. "Repeat the incident again." He heard a faint sob. Alaia's. What were they doing to her? The same thing they had done to him -- and to Faron with more success. He knew it vaguely, as he knew he had been in tips room before. He reached the rail and looked down. She lay on her back in the center of a metal-plated floor far below. A Piszjil sat at a control-panel watching her coldly, while his saffron spokesman sat as if asleep behind him. "Repeat the incident again," the voice insisted, as the creature touched a control. A humming sound filled the room. She spoke slowly, as if in a trance, and he had to iisten closely to understand her words. "Sahl, put that rod down! For God's sake! No... #" A pause, then a more frantic note: "You hit him! Sahl! You broke his leg! Faron, get out of his way! He's gone berserk!" on the rail. He clenched his teeth to keep from shouting a denial that he knew could never pass the block. They were forging memories, rooting out old ones, making new ones! Had they done the same to him? "Sahl, I've got a gun... Put the rod down... Put it down, and let him alone... Sahl! Get away from me . I . Get back or I'll shoot!... Sahl! All right! I warned you! Now it's too -- " Her voice Stopped suddenly. She made a choking sound. Then: "It's a lie, it's a lie, it's a lie! You're making me imagine this. I didn't kill him. I didn't kill... drrrnnnnnnngggggg -- A sudden drone of surging power. As he stared, an aura of corona discharge flickered around her body like pale phosphorescence. Her screams were wild, insane, piercing. Sahl's belly was a sick knot. He hung panting on the rail, unable to draw himself away. The corona shimmered and flared and hissed -- and subsided a little. "#I right!" she shrieked. "All right! Anything! I killed him! Okay! Make it stop!" Abruptly the corona disappeared. The Eridanian pressed another control. He heard a faint buzz of power, but there was no glow display. Alaia moaned -- apparently with relief. "Thank God!" she kept saying. "Thank God! Don't let it stop. Ohhhhh..." And then her voice became a low mumble of relief. The buzz of power died. He saw her stiffen. "Repeat the incident again," said the calm voice. She was silent for a moment, then spoke nervously. "I really didn't kill him; the gun went off accidentally" A long pause. Then the operator said, "Repeat the incident again, as you recall it." Sahl gritted his teeth. They were making her invent a false memory. He listened to her going through the imaginary scene again as if she were actually feeling, seeing, hearing it. "Alaia!" he shouted. "Alaia! Up here!" Nothing happened. No response either from the girl or from his internal system of blocks. She continued the reenactment. "Alaia! It's a lie -- oh! Uhg!" His voice choked off, and he gasped for air. Crying hysterically, he slipped to the floor -- and knew he had lost. They hadn't managed to blank his memory, but they had made him helpless. He knew dismally that he would do exactly what they wanted him to. Maybe it would be better to wind up like Faron. Faron at least didn't have to realize his condition. And it would be easy, just to let the unwanted things slip away into oblivion. To forget, and accept. That thought too was planted in you, warned the voice of sanity. Suddenly Alaia was screaming again that it was all a lie, a rotten lie, and it had never really happened. Then the terrifying drrrnngg of the pain-making aura that seared every nerve ending without numbing or damaging tissue. Her screams came to him this time as inevitable effect of known cause. She was trying to hang on the way he had done -- but could do no longer He picked himself up slowly and crept back to his cage. And something had slipped away, although he was not quite aware of what he had lost. J. Sahl," Wolek Parn said wearily as they entered the Captain's cabin on the Ark, "even though I can't say you were much of a diplolike a wild animal." He paused to glance back at the biologist with mixed emotion, most of it carefully restrained. "You look worn out, worried. I suppose your visit was pretty unnerving in spots." Sahl nodded thoughtfully, felt a constriction in his throat, and muttered, "Not bad." The capain satdown and remained silent for a moment. Sahl stood quietly facing him and waiting. He dared make no long speeches, nor any unfavorable comment about the planet, or its keepers. He knew what he could say, and what was unspeakable. Over fi week had passed since his first experience with the conditioned blocks, and he had learned the limitations. "I low's Alaia?" Parn asked. "Fine," he said casually. Lying face down, he thought, with a baby parasite burrowing into her back. They had done that for him. If he convinced Parn to bring the colony down, they'd remove the parasite from her before its roots grew too deep. If he failed, they said they'd let it stay. "How's Faron?" "Fine," he lied in the same tone. Parn sighed deeply. "I'm a little disappointed in you, Sahl. But then -- we won't go into that. Results count, I guess -- and they apparently aren't bitter about the two dead ones, nor about your behavior. A#J I wanted you back here for was to confirm what you said on the telecast. I was a little suspicious that you might be coerced, or hypnotized, and made to say it. You weren't, were you?" "No." Tlley had told him what he had said on the telecast, but he hoped he wouldn't have to repeat any of it now. Ridiculous position I'm in, he thought, with the only club inside my head. What was worse, he knew a way to attack, a way to strike out at the Piszjil, but he could neither do it, nor reveal it to Parn. A weapon, but it couldn't be used. He had known about it in a general way for quite a while, but now the knowledge was more specific. And useless. "You confirm everything you said in the broadcast then?" For a time, he tried to remain silent. But the silence itself was forbidden, and after a moment he had to choke it out. "I confirm it all." Parn was staring at him peculiarly. "You feel all right? You look pale. There's nothing wrong with you now, is there?" "Nothing, nothing at all." Parn's hand slipped unobtrusively to a panel of buttons. He pressed one of them quietly, then folded his hands under his chin and put on a sour smile. He spent the next five minutes talking about the hard time he had endured trying to handle the restless colonists during the delegation's absence. and two men entered: Doctor Roli Karme and a burly colonist. They glanced at Parn, then at the biologist. Karme put out a big hand and spoke with a friendly half-grin. "Glad to see you, Sahl." The biologist noticed that he was carrying a medical kit in his other hand. He frowned slightly and wondered. "How much time?" Karme muttered mysteriously to the Captain. Pam gestured toward the screen. "There's their ship waiting for him. It's obviously armed this time. They wanted to come with him, but I refused. They may come anyway, if we take too long." What were they talking about? He began to feel frightened. Karme turned to him with the friendly smile. "Would you stretch out on that cot, Sahl. I want to examine you. Won't take long." "Wh-why?" He couldn't do it, if it were for a forbidden purpose. But then, he shouldn't have asked. "Just want to see that you're all right." Physically? He bore no physical marks. He nodded slighly and obeyed. Karme made a very cursory inspection, then produced a hyp# syringe. He pulled at Sahl's sleeve. "What's that for? What -- ?" "Just a sedative. Won't affect you for long." "I don't need -- " But Karme had deftly stung him with . it and emptied the barrel in a moment. He began to feel warm and relaxed. The doctor slipped something around his arm and pulled it tight. "Blood pressure?" "Same kind of thing, isn't it?" came the non-committal answer. But then Karme had another syringe, and this time he probed for a vein. When Sahl protested, the burly colonist came in and sat on him, and Parn held his arm. The lights went dimmer by degree, and the room swirled about him. "Let's go back to the telecast," said a distant voice. "Sahl, you're telecasting to Captain Parn about the planet... Events became a tide of confusion. Questions. Answers. Shouts. There was fear, and deep retreat into blackness, so deep that answering became impossible, and consciousness was briefly gone. How long did it last? There was no spacing of events called "time" in the confusion. Events came and went, but there was no order among them. Voices plagued him, demanded the impossible of him, and finally let him alone. understood was Parn's. He lay with his eyes closed and listened. "I can't understand it, Roli. Sahl always seemed like a fairly stable fellow, sour sometimes, and chilly. I just can't see him making an impassioned speech; it's out of character." "He made it all right. The memory's there somewhere, because snatches of it came out. He made the telecast, but -- " "What?" "The way it came out this time was... well, mechanical, and frantic. Didn't it strike you that way?" "Yeah, and this other thing bothers me too." "The sensitive areas? I can't understand it either, Skipper. Why should he put up such a howl when that second Piszjil again? He couldn't have reacted that way while he did it. He was -- " Sahl sat up with a sudden shudder. "I couldn't kill one of them!" he shouted. "I couldn't!" The three of them turned to watch him for a moment, and exchanged quiet glances among themselves. He slumped, covering his face with his hands. Something had slipped away from him for a time, but now he remembered. There had been a time when he could kill the things if need be. But now -- it was different. "Listen to me, Sahl," Karme said quietly, and waited for the biologist to look up. "We know something's wrong. Your response mechanisms are fouled up in spots. Speech and motor areas are affected. You block to certain things, refuse a response, and retreat. Not now, but under the drug. Now you're conscious, and you can choose alternate responses -- cover up for the blocks. Under the drug, you didn't. Now, do you understand what I mean?" He understood perfectly, but he could only say, "Nothing happened. I'm all right." A long silence, then Karme said, "I want you to respond to my next questions by saying just the opposite of what you mean. If you mean 'yes', say 'no'. If you mean 'good', say 'bad'. All right?" "Yeah, I guess so." "First question: was the telecast authentically yours?" He opened his mouth, but no sound came. The block was literal, and he couldn't say 'no'. But the block was also interpretive, and he couldn't communicate the facts by saying 'yes'. But if he remained silent they would know something was wrong, and that also was forbidden. He screamed. "Grab him, quick!" Pam bellowed. Someone wa shaking him back to consciousness and he fought them. But the light was strong in his eyes, and the taste of neurodrine was in his mouth. "You've got to send the colony down," he babbled. "It's fine, everything's fine." A palm crashed hard across his face in a brutal slap. "Nothing personal, Sahl," Pam growled. "But if you don't snap out of it, I'm going to beat hell out of you." Anything, if it would help release the flood of pent-up knowledge and the unspeakable plan for attack. Mentioning the plan wasn't blocked literally, for the Piszjil hadn't thought of it specifically, but he couldn't talk about it because of his own intent to use it against them. He lay panting and staring at Parn. "Let him alone. Skipper," Karine said quietly. "He wants to say something, but he can't." "I've seen enough!" the Captain grunted. "It's obvious that something's been done to him. We can't go down." He turned to watch the screen. "They're waiting out there for an answer. They haven't made any threats, but damned if I like the looks of that armament. The first ship didn't have it. They put it on for something." "Why do they want us down there?" Karme complained. "Why should they invite a wild wolf to come wandering through their tame flocks?" Sahl lay forcing the immediacy of the situation out of his mind, tried to force away the present, tried to think of nothing. Wolf, sheep, dog, rabbit -- "Rabbit," he said. "Somebody introduced rabbits into Australia." "What's he babbling about?" Karme fell thoughtful. "Historical incident. Intercontinental tampering with fauna. Introduction of a rabbit pest." "So?" Karme shrugged. "Means nothing to me." It had meant a spasm of agony for Sahl. He tried again, rejecting the present, keeping only a vague notion in mind. "Japanese beetles -- huhhh!" "He's choking!" "He's trying to say something." Karme paused. "What do we have in the stocking lockers besides rabbits and rats?" "Bees, weasels, blacksnakes, foxes -- oh hell! -- everything small and wild. Not to mention the seeds and nuts and bacteria cultures. He was supposed to decide which, if any, of the Earth-forms should be cut loose on the alien planet." Karme turned to Sahl. "What is the answer to that, by the way?" Just one small word. One small word would do it. And then it would be done. His jaw worked frantically, and his breathing was agonized. The conditioning. It had to wear off sometime, FyfFhad said. Just a word! "Well?" the doctor insisted. "Which species should be released here ?" It came out in a scream of rage. Particularly the weasels to attack the fat little egg carriers, and the foxes to kill the fur balls, and the rats to infest the cities, and the rabbits to gnaw on something vital until a flora sickened and shrank back from the rank aggressive grasses and the rampant weeds, until the towering trees arose to rob the modest gardens of sunlight. Villages would suffer famine and either wander or die, and there would be hell to pay for the designers of a tailored system. And Man? He could not safely enter the planet of peace, but a world in turmoil was just his meat. Famines made nomads, and someone had to lead a village in flight. It would be touch and go, for awhile, but as a wandering savage, Man would have a chance. The colony had wanted nothing more in th beginning. "Something cracked!" Karine snapped. "He's slipping into gibberish." "What to do?" "Find out what he's trying to say. I can take him down to the lab, try everything from hypnosis to insulin shock. It'll be pretty tough on him though. May not be much left when it's over." "You have my permission to kill him," Parn said pleasantly. Karme bent over the stricken biologist and frowned. "Now what the hell made him grin like that?" altitude, streaking through the night toward the dawnline, and only an occasional creature looked up, or opened the palm of his hand skyward to see if the faint rattling in the brush was rain. Beyond the dawn-line and over the day-zone, and past the place where the landing was assigned, where a delegation waited, and turned, and frowned after the departing rockets. No matter. They were foolish to try to escape, these launches. There was no place that they could land and make a break for freedom, for the world was subdued and orderly. The world was cut to a pattern, and the world would capture the colonists quickly, no matter where they tried to run. The rockets landed on the nightside, two of them did. Two others disgorged their "colonists" in different places on the day-side. When the "colonists" were out, and scurrying away through the brush, the pilots emerged to wait. A voice came from seven thousand miles away, and it spoke mockingly from the moon. "You have been pested," it said. "Your garden is full of weeds. And we are still up here." "You will be destroyed immediately," came the curt cold answer. "The pests are our pests, and we know how to deal with them," the mocker replied. "Do you?" There was a worried silence. "Refuel our launches and send them back up," demanded the moon-voice. "We're coming down." Wolek Pam bracketed the microphone and grinned at the dazed man who lay on the cot. "Brace up, Sahl. The worst pests that ever infested anyplace will be down there soon. Us. One of the pilots demanded that they let Alaia go, and Faron -- if he wants to. I think they will." Sahl's hand slipped over his forehead. There was a lot that he couldn't remember. Blank spaces. "You got the idea across. I know it tore you up. You'll pull out okay, though. Of course, humans are still in for a rough go down there for awhile. But 'then -- when haven't they been? We'll make out all right. We always have... Only One Question Is Eternal -- What Lies Beyond the Ultimate?, and By Milton Lesser it is a foolish war we fight. My brother told me that, for one, back in the Sunset Country. But then, my brother is lame and good for nothing but drawing pictures of the stars. He connects them with lines, like a child's puzzle, and so makes star-pictures. He has fish stars, archer stars, hunter stars. That, I would say, is what is foolish. Perhaps that is what started it all. I was looking at the stars, trying to see the pictures, when I should have been minding my sentry post. They took me like a baby, like a tot not yet given to the wearing of clothing. The hand came out of the darkness and clamped over my mouth, and I ceased my struggling when I felt a sharp blade pricking at the small of my back. At first I feared that they would slay the entire camp as it slept and I cursed my brother for his star pictures, cursed our leader who had sent us here, twenty archers, against the Onist outpost on our country's border. But the Onists had other ideas. They took me away. I had to admire their vitality, because all night we ran through the silent woodlands, and they seemed tireless. I could maintain their pace, of course: but I'm a Pluralist. I could see their village from a long way off, its night fires glowing in the dark. It was only then that we slowed our pace. Soon we entered the place, a roughly circular area within a stockade, and my captors thrust me within a hut. I couldn't do much worrying about tomorrow, not when I was so tired. I slept. I dreamed a stupid dream about the Onist beliefs, the beliefs of an unimaginative people who could picture one Maker and one Maker only. I must have chuckled in my sleep. "You're awake." cause I had sat up, squinted into the bright sunlight streaming in through the doorway, yawned and stretched. The Onists, I tell you, lack imagination. The girl who spoke was a pretty enough little thing for an Onist. She smiled, showing even white teeth. "Do you Pluralists eat?" I nodded and rubbed my belly. I was to have had dinner after my turn as sentry the night before, and now I felt like I could do justice to my portion even at one of the orgies for which the Onists are so famous. ' "Bring on your food and I'll show you," I told her, and she turned her back to walk outside. It was early and the village seemed silent -- surely they hadn't intended this one slim maid to guard me! Yet she seemed alone. I leaped at her, circled her neck with my arm, prepared to make my exit. They would laugh around our fire when I told them of this fine, example of the Onist lack of foresight -- Except that the girl yelped. Not loudly, but it was loud enough, and a big muscular Onist came striding in with his throwing spear. He backed me off into a corner, prodding my hungry belly with his weapon. "Will you behave?" I backed outside, but this time I could see his shadow across the doorway. The girl brought food and partook of it with me. I was surprised, because we Pluralists will not eat with an Onist out of choice. Well, I have said they are a strange people. Soon the girl stood up, patting her mouth daintily with a square of cloth, and in that, of course, she was trying to mime our graceful Pluralist women. "I suppose you think we are going to kill you," she said. Just like that. "To tell you the truth, I haven't given it much thought. There isn't much I can do about it." "Well, we're not. We could have done that back at your camp. We could have killed all of you. No, we want to show you something." I had a ridiculous thought that they made star-pictures, too- -- even those who are not lame like my brother. I said, "Well, what will happen to me after you show me?" She smiled. "You still think we're going to kill you. What's your name?" I told her, but I thought: she can't even keep a conversation going without changing the subject. "Jak," she repeated after me. "That's a common enough name. We have Jaks among our Onist people, you know." "No, I didn't. But you probably copied it." "I doubt that. We were here first, Jak. Our records say so. Probably, you once captured a man with that name, long ago, liked it, and took it for your people." "You were here first!" I sneered. "Maybe that's what your records tell you, but it isn't so. Look: the Makers endowed us with life, then went away in to the sky. By mistake they left one idiot-Maker behind, and he had nothing to do. He made you Onists before he perished, and that is why you think there is only one Maker." She seemed highly insulted. "Idiot-Maker? Idiot! There was only one Maker, ever, but because your minds cannot conceive of all that glory residing in one figure, you invented a score." Now it was my turn to be indignant. "A score? Hundreds, you mean; thousands -- more than there are leaves on the trees." "Well, I won't argue with you. Our war has been arguing that point well enough." I was sorry she would not argue. She looked very pretty when she argued, her breasts heaving, her eyes sparkling fire. "What's your name?" I asked. "Nari. My name is Nari. And don't tell me you had that name first!" I smiled blandly. "Of course we did. I have an aunt, my mother's sister, who goes by that name. My brother's wife's cousin, also; but she is very ugly." "And am I ugly?" Nari wanted to know. I guess in that sense at least, women are the same everywhere -- Pluralist or Onist, it doesn't matter. I so hard that it made her blush, and then she looked even prettier. But I didn't tell her so. "You will pass, for an Onist," I admitted. "I guess the Onists might consider you pretty; the Onist men might stamp their feet and shout if you go by -- but then, they are Onists." At that, she seemed on the verge of leaving my prison hut, but something made her change her mind. She stayed all morning and on into the afternoon. We argued all the time, except at midday, when she went outside to get our lunch. She stumbled a little and fell half against my shoulder. I moved toward her to hold her up, and it was the most natural thing in the world to take her in my arms and kiss her. She must have thought so, too; she responded beautifully -- for an Onist. After lunch, Nari did not mention the kiss, nor did I. It now seemed the most natural thing in the world not to talk about it. We argued some rriore, Nari defending her primitive beliefs, I trying to show her the light of truth. But it was no use: the war had been fought and the war would continue. Later that day we set out. That came as a surprise to me, because I had taken it for granted that whatever the Onists wanted to show me was right here in this little village. A dozen of us went, and when we had been on the trail for some little time, Nari joined us, declaring that she wanted to see it again -- whatever it was. We went for three days, and although these Onists turned out to be better woodsmen than I had thought, still, they could not match the skill we Pluralists have mastered over the generations. I believe I could have escaped, had I wanted to; but I hardly seemed a prisoner of war, and besides, once or twice when we had lagged to the rear of the column, Nari stumbled against me like that day in the hut, and what could I do but kiss her? It was another village we reached at the end of our march, much bigger than the first. Surprisingly, it looked a lot like a Pluralist town, although it may only have seemed so because I had been out in the woodlands for three days. They took me straightways to the village square, and it was there that I saw the statue. rare, and I was surprised to see one in an Onist village. I got on my knees at once to do it reverence. I realize it was impious to look up, but I did -- I had to see if it were the genuine thing. And it was, to the last detail. Constructed of the forbidden substance known as metal, it towered three times a Pluralist's height, or three times a Onist's, for that matter. I have always wondered why the.Makers did not create our ancestors in their own substance, as they had fashioned us in their image. But that is an impious thought. A stern gray-haired Onist who said he was Nari's father took me aside afterwards. "Now, Jak," he asked me, "what can you say of what you have seen?" I shrugged. "I can say that somehow you've found one of jhe Maker statues. What more?" "It's one, is it not?" "Of course it's one. They are rare, but I have seen three, all told, in Pluralist villages." "And each time they were separate? You never saw a group?" "No. No I didn't." He slapped his hands together triumphantly. "Then that proves it. Each is a copy of the original Maker, but there was only one. Otherwise you would have seen statues in groups. And that is why you are here, Jak: we want you to go back to your people and tell them what you saw." I shook my head. "What you say isn't logical. So what if the statues are never in pairs or groups? We've only seen a few, when once there must have been many. Also, when your artists do their magic with dyes and create portraits, are they generally done one at a time or in groups?" "One at a time, so the artist may capture the personality in each face, naturally. I have seen group portraits, but I think they are silly things." "Exactly." Now I was triumphant. "Exactly as the Makers thought, which is why the statues are always single -- " "But it is impious to say there was more than one Maker! He had all the knowledge in the world at his fingertips, and so there was no need for more than one. More than this world, even: he went to the stars. Or don't you believe that?" "Of course I believe it. Only, they went to the stars, the thousands of Makers. It isn't impious, because if you can think of one being as great as that, try to picture thousands. Yes, thousands. That makes me thousands of times more pious than you Onists." He shook his head wearily. "What's the use? It is for this we are fighting our war, and we thought if we took one of you here, showed him the undeniable truth of our statue... Well, will you at least return to your people with a tale of what you have seen?" I agreed readily enough: probably, the alternative was death. Although Pluralists on rare occasions have been known to take Onist women as their wives, an Onist prisoner of war was an unwanted thing. The reverse would also be true. for Nari. I could not find her anywhere in the village, and a little sadly I set out on my long journey back to the Sunset Land. By now our raiding party had finished its work on the small Onist village on the rim of our country, and I could do nothing but return to my people, where we might plan new strategy against the unbelievers. But I had wanted to bid Nari farewell. I met her in the woodlands, a travel bag slung over her shoulder like a male's. "I wanted to say goodbye privately," she told me. "Good," I said, but I knew she was lying. Else why the travel bag? "Goodbye," Nari whispered, but she was not looking at me. Looking, instead, behind her, at the land of her people. "Nari," I told her, "I have to admit it. You are very pretty -- even by Pluralist standards. You are -- " This time she did not stumble against me. It wasn't necessary. I drew her to me, and I kissed her a long kiss. Then I told her I loved her, and women, I suppose, will always be women, because she said she knew it. I will take Nari back to our village in the Sunset Land, where we will be married by the laws of my people, And if ever there is to be peace between the Pluralists and the Onists, it may, after all, come on these grounds. The Onists have their beliefs, and so I hate them for their impious thoughts. But the love of a man for a maid exists apart from that. It won't be easy. Our arguing continued all the way back to the Sunset Land, and Nari is as stubborn as I am firm. "There is one Maker," she said. And I told her, "No, there are many." Or later, as we neared the Sunset Land, we picked up the thread of our thoughts again. Pluralist or Onist, we androids are dogmatic creatures. "One Robot created us all before he went to the stars," said Nari. "Robots," I said. "Many Robots." But I kissed her. They lifted Hoiman's scratch, thus causing him to lose much smoosh. So he grabbed his bum and hit the high orbit.  Hoiman and the Solar Circuit By Gordon Dewey Maloney across the back of the check and handed it to Nick, the bartender. "Leave me something to operate on," I told him. Nick turned it over. "Still with the News?" The question was rhetorical. I let it pass without swinging at it. I was mentally estimating the total of the pile of tabs Nick pulled out of the cash register, like a fighter on percentage trying to count the house. I didn't like the figure it gave me... Nick added them up, then added them again before he pulled some bills out of the money drawer and said, "Here's thirty skins. Your rent due?" "This'll cover it. I'll do my drink i lie, here." I went over to a booth and sat down. I lit a cigarette. I smoked. And waited. Presently Sherry, tall, dark and delicious, decided I was making like a customer, and strolled over. "Would you like a menu, Mr. Maloney?" she trilled. "Larry to you," I reminded her. "No menu. Bring me a steak. Big. Thick. Rare. And a plate of french fries. No salad. Bread and butter. Coffee." She managed at last to pull her writing hand out of mine, and I had to repeat the order. Unless it could be turned into money. Sherry's memory was limited strictly to the present instant. She put in the order, then brought me a set-up. I let my eyes go over her, real careful, for maybe the thousandth time. No doubt of it -- the lassie had a classy chassis. If she just wouldn't yak so damn much. "Did you see the matches last night?" She didn't wait for my answer, just went on with the yat-a-ta. "I spent the whole evening just glued to my television set. I was simply enthralled. When the Horrible Hungarian got the Flying Hackensack on -- " "Standing Hackenschmidt, Sherry!" wanted to -- to scratch his eyes out." I pointed out that McElroy weighed in at two forty-one and had gone on to win the match. Sherry never heard me. "And the way the Weeping Greek kept hitting the other fellow -- the announcer said he was throwing Judo cutlets." "Cuts, not cutlets." "But aren't Judo cutlets illegitimate?" The barest hint of a puzzled frown tugged at her flawless brows as she poured ice water into my glass. "The word," I repeated, "is cuts. And the blow is not illegal." I gave my eyes another treat. What a chassis. And what a mind. "Anything these days, so long as you don't kill your opponent, is legal in wrestling." Suddenly we had company; a little man who made scarcely a sound as he slid into my booth and sat facing me. "Rassling, yet," he said, in hitter tones. "What a woid. Dun't be saying it." He helped himself to a cigarette from my pack Kin", on the table, and put the pack in I I is pocket. He lit the cigarette, it .,m; luy lighter, which he held a moment longer than necessary before replacing it -- regretfully -- on the table. He inhaled deeply. "Rassling!" he repeated. "Leave us not discuss it." and his brown suit -- in which the chalk stripes were beginning to blend with the background -- was threadbare. He needed a shave, and his fingernails were dirty. He was vaguely familiar. The beady little eyes flicked up at me, and all uncertainty dissolved. "Oh, no!" I said. "Not you. Not -- " He exhaled a great cloud of smoke. "Hoiman Katz," he said, in dejected tones. "It is me, again... The same as like always, only not so better." He sighed. Sherry's tongue had been shifting from one foot to the other, waiting for an opening. "Are you a wrestler, Mr. Katz?" she asked brightly. Hoiman half rose from his seat, and the cigarette dropped from his lax mouth. Then he slumped down again, spread his hands, shrugged, and said, "Now I esk you!" ' Sherry said, "I guess not." Then, "Shall I bring y.ou something?" Her eyes were on me as she asked. She hadn't worked on Vine Street for six years without learning the ropes -- about people at least. I nodded. Katz was waiting for the nod. He licked his lips. "I'll have a -- " "Planet Punch?" "No. I'll have a -- " "Sojar Sling? Martian Mule?" Hoiman's eyes squinted shut, and he winced eloquently. "Martian!" he groaned. "With rassling, too! Bring me a bottle of beer. Two bottles!" After a moment he peered cautiously through slitted lids. "Is she gone?" he whispered. "Such woids. Rassling. Martian. Better I should have stood in Hollywood." I laughed. "What's the matter with wrestling, Hoiman? Last I heard you were managing a good boy -- what was his name?" "Killer Coogan? That bum!" I had to do some thinking back. "Yeah," I said, "that's the boy. Started wrestling back in the fifties. Good crowd pleaser. Took the Junior Heavyweight Championship from Brickbuster Bates. Had a trick hold he called the pretzel bend -- hard to apply, but good for a submission every time when he clamped it on. Right?"  "Okay, so he won some bouts with it. But that was twenty-five years ago. He's slower, can't use that holt any more. We ain't had no main events for a long time, and my bum is a big eater, see?" "So?" "So Hoiman Katz is not sleeping yet at the switch. He's got it up here." A grimy forefinger tapped his wrinkled brow. "I says, Hoiman, if we don't get it here, we gotta go where we can get it." Sherry came back with Hoiman's two bottles of beer, and my steak and french fries. The steak was a dream, and the french fries were a crisp, rich golden brown that started my mouth watering. Sherry wanted to talk. I waved her down, and she went away pouting. If there was a story in Hoiman I wanted to get it without interference. He was pouring a second glass of beer. His beady eyes swivelled up to mine, then quickly away. "You want I should tell you about my bum ?" I mumbled something through a mouthful of good juicy steak. Hoiman sighed, reminiscently, and a grimy paw swooped into my french fries. I moved them to the other side of my steak platter. the Coast, (Hoiman said) . My bumtook all comers. Slasher Slade had his abominal stretch. Crusher Kane had his rolling rocking horse split; ManslaughterMurphy had his cobra holt -- but none of those guys had anything like my Bum's pretzel bend. He. trun 'em all, and they stayed trun. That was fine. All through the fifties, and the sixties we made plenty scratch. Maybe it slowed down, but we was eating regular. In the seventies my bum was slowing up. I shoulda seen it when he started missing his holt. That leaves him wide open, see? And twict the other bum moiders him. That was recent -- they was just putting in regular passenger service on the space lines, so you could buy tickets to the Moon, or Venus or Mars. Depended on whether you was ducking a bill or some broad. By this time my bum is getting pinned to the mat too regular, and we're slipping out of the big dough. I counts up our lettuce one day, an'd I says to my bum, I says, Ray, I says, you and me are going to the Moon. So what if they didn't have a rassling circuit there yet, I tell him. Just leave it to your uncle Hoiman. We'll make our own circuit. I figured that the ribbon clerks wouldn't be taking space rides for awhile, and if we went to the Moon we'd find some bums there who could give my bum a good bout, but not fast enough to toss him. So we went there.  Holman's eyes, looking into the past, had lost their beadiness. He'd shifted his third glass of beer to his right hand, and his left, seemingly of its own volition, had found my plate of french fries. The pile had dwindled by half, and tell-tale potato crumbs were lodged in the whiskers on Hoiman's unshaven chin. Neither beer nor potatoes in his mouth seemed to matter -- he went right on talking at the same rate. It takes me two weeks, (Hoiman continued), to ballyhoo up a bout, line up another bum, fix up the ring and hall and everything...We was down to our last lettuce that night. I gets my bum' by the ear, and I tells him, I says, make it a good show. But don't take no chancesthis is winner take all, and we better not lose. Don't use your pretzel bend unlessen you have to. This bum wc rassle was a big miner, see:' -- hard as the rocks he juggles around in the daytime. He was stronger'n my bum, but he don't know nothing about rassling. My bum tried a step-over toehold on him, but he knows how to kick. My bum goes through the ropes. He don't try that no more. They rassle around, and eight minutes later my bum takes first fall with a body press after flattening the miner w'ith a hard knee lift. I told my bum to let him take the second fall, which he does. The big miner gets a head scissors on him and like to moiders him before he can submit. Ray isn't liking it, and he takes the third one quick with a abominal stretch, which surprises the big guy and takes all the fight outa him. He didn't know they was holts like that, and he passes the word around that my bum has plenty moxie. So we get only one more bout on the Moon -- but outa the two we get enough scratch to take us to Venus. Hoiman paused, trying hard to pour more beer out of the empty second bottle. He licked his lips like they were real dry, and his beady eyes flicked a glance at me that came and went as fast as the tip of a swinging rapier. I signalled Sherry to bring two more bottles of beer. Hoiman relaxed, sighed, gazing almost affectionately at the new crop of french fries which had appeared suddenly in his clutching fist. Sherry, still pouting, came with the beer, and ten seconds later Hoiman was talking again. We did okay on Venus, (he said). Before long I have a regular little circuit woiked up in the three spaceports, and they is plenty bums there what think they can rassle. Some of them can -- my bum has to use his pretzel bend oftener and oftener. He's lucky, and he don't slip none clamping it on -- at first. I have ta tell you about them Venusians. Them dustlanders, I mean. They got big flat wide feet for padding through the dust, and their noses are like a big spongy thing all over their puss, to filter the dust out. So they got no expression on their pans. A guy like me, which has got a real expressive face, could And their eyes -- round and flat, big as silver dollars. Them dustlanders was nuts about ras sling. They flock to the rassling shows and buy good seats. They don't do no hollering and waving like people do. Just sit there, staring out of them big flat eyes and making funny chuffing noises at each other when some bum would get a good hold on the other. My bum didn't pay them no never mind at foist, but one day he tells me he keeps feeling them eyes on him while he's rasslin'. I give him the old razz -- but that night he tries for hispretzel bend, and misses. The other bum is young and fast, and my bum gets trun, but good! So this happens a few more times, and my bum says we gotta move on -- he can't rassle no more with them dustlanders staring at him and chuffing about him. Some of them ear benders on Venus are studying up on the side, anyhow, and the outlook for my bum ain't so good no more nohow. So we go to Mars. I signalled Sherry for my coffee, as Hoiman ground to a stop while he refilled his glass. I swear my eyes weren't away from the table for more than a half second, but in that moment all the french fries left my plate. I yielded to Fate -- is wasn't meant to be that I eat french fries this pay day. Things are primitive like on Mars, (Hoiman was saying), on accounta the troubles they have with power there. We rassled under some funny set-ups, but that's okay with me as long as my bum tosses his man. This time they ain't none of them screwy Venusians to put the whammy on him, and he's doing okay. Until -- I gotta admit it -- I get deluges of grandeur, or something. I gotta tell ya about them Martians. They are about seven feet tall, not too heavy, but they got plenty moxie. And an extra pair of arms, so I get to thinking they oughta be terrific in the ring. Just so they ain't too terrific. I ask my bum, I says to him, I says, could he, does he think, trun one of them Martians? He says iffen he has to he'll use his pretzel bend, and they ain't no Martian on six legs, or eight, what won't say uncle. So I check with the Colony Administrator, and he says it's okay for a match perviding we don't interfere with any of their beliefs or customs or conventions. I ast him what were they, and he told me the Martians never talked about them, . so we'd just have to be careful.  What the hell, I says to my bum. A bout's a bout. So I start promoting. First I find out do them Martians have a bum what wants to rassle my bum, winner 'take all -- which is the way we like to rassle, when I know my bum can trun the other bum. Natch. I don't mean we talk to the Martians -- I don't savvy them squeaks they use on each other. We hire an interpreter -- we have to take his word for it that everything is woiking out. So the night of the match comes around and them Martians insist on having it in their own town, Meekweek it sounds like, near as I can say it in people talk. Remember I told you it was primitive? You never seen nothing like this. They don't live with people by the way. They live off by theirselves in their own town. The ring and mat and ropes are okay -- not regulation, but nothing to squawk about.' Them lights was what get me. The Martians got no power, so they make a deal with some insecks. Cross my heart -- 'sa fack. You never see such insecks. Round, big as a dinner plate, flat on top, rounded off on the bottom. They stay up in the air by spinning like a wheel -- just like them flying saucers the Rigellians was spying on us in the fifties. You wouldn't remember about that. At night the bottom part of them insecks lights up like a big electric bulb, almost as bright, too. They was enough of them zinging around over the ring to make it look like it was floodlighted. My bum says they remind him of them dish-eyed Venusians, but I quick change the subjeck. That shoulda tipped me off -- shoulda give me a freemonition that the party was gonna get rough. If I'da known how rough, we'da stood in town. The Martian bum is a big mug, and those four arms of his look mighty plural. I quick tells my bum, I says to him, I says, watch out for arm locks and leg strangles. If that overgrowed spider ever gets one on you he'll double keylock it! and get their instructions. Mostly the ref makes motions. The Martian nods his head like he understands fine. When the ref is telling them about trunnin' each other outen the ring, the Martian makes a motion like can he trun his man up in the rafters? The ref shakes his head no, and that seems to satisfy the Martian. The timekeeper blows a whistle, and things start to moving. That Martian Mangier puts down his two middle limbs, uses them like legs, and is across the ring and swarming all over my bum while he is still taking his foist step. Before you know it the ref is counting one, two, three, and my bum is trun for the foist fall. The Martian is using his middle limbs like arms, and he has a hammerlock and an arm strangle both on my bum -- and both of them keylocked ! The ref gets them untangled, and I quick tell my bum we ain't hurt until we get trun twict. So I tell him how to get that next fall -- to keep away from them four arms and keep circling until he gets a chance to clamp on the pretzel bend. The whistle blows, and this time my bum uses my head. When the Martian Mangier gallops over to his corner, my bum has went through the ropes and quick runs around on the apron to the other side and comes at the Martian from behind before the goof knows what's happening. He lets the Martian have a rabbit punch, then a forearm smash, then a knee to his stomach. The Martian leans over, .kinda sick, maybe, and gets a knee lift to the smoosh. This softens him up good, and my bum clamps the pretzel bend on him. That Martian squirms like an octopus, 'with arms and legs flying in all directions. And you coulda knocked me over with a subpoena when he got out of it! Your guess is as good as mine, how he done it. But my bum is moving fast, and he gives him some more knee lifts and a drop kick or two, and then a hair mare, and he falls on him for a body press and gets the count. Each bum has got a fall. You shoulda heard them Martians there squeaking this time -- ten times as loud as when their bum won the foist fall. But they had no squawks. These flying chandeliers they had, they kinda bunched up to follow the action, and the light was good so the ref couldn't make no mistake about it. That Martian squirming out of the pretzel bend don't look so good, so I tell my bum not to use it for the thoid fall. I tell him to give the Martian some more of them , knee lifts -- he don't get along with them at all. I tell him to folly that up with a airplane spin and a body slam. My bum follys instructions to the alphabet, and that is just what happens. He bangs that Martian around with elbow smashes and knee lifts till he don't know is he on one leg or six. Then he goes in fast and grabs him by a coupla legs and arms, holds him up in the air, and spins him like a pinwheel. Right away I knowed something was in the air besides that Martian Mangier. Oil Did things happen all to onct! My bum slams the Martian and falls on him for the count, and wins the thoid fall and the match. That part is okay. But while the Martian is still up in the air I notice that all the squeaking from the Martians has stopped all of a sudden. So from the Martians we are getting nothing but silence, strictly wholesale. I think maybe that's natural when their burrf gets trun. And then -- plop! plop! plop! -- and them flying light bulbs all drop down flat on the mat and lay there just like the Martian bum, until they isn't enough light in the house to see to strike a match. And then the squeaking starts again, like a barely see them Martians starting for the ring. I gets my bum by the arm and tells him something tells me we better blow the joint. We blow, fast. Them Martians is mad about something which I ain't had time to figure out, yet. My bum steps on one of them animated light fixtures when he gets out of the ring and squashes it. A puddle of light squirts out, and natch he steps in it. We are scramming through that crowd like mad, and we are in the clear. But we hear them squeaks behind us for a long time. They are follyin' the glowing footprints my bum is leaving to point the way. He emptied the last bottle of beer, holding it upended for a long time waiting for the final laggard drop to detach itself. He stalled over his drink, waiting for me to ask him what happened, so I did. He put on his most wounded expression, and I knew then that he'd suffered a mortal blow -- to his purse. Yeah, we got away, I made my bum trun away his flashy shoes so they couldn't track us by them. We walked all the way back to Neopolis, the people city. All kinds of plain and fancy rumors beat us there, so the Colony Cops put us in protective custody until they got the straight story. Nobody ever saw another Martian. It seems that they got some trick notions about theirselves. They are proud because they can walk on the ground and don't have to fly, so they got a hearty contemp for things that fly, like them insecks which they used for house lights. Now, them insecks is dopes too and would give anything if they could walk like the Martians. And the Martians know the insecks can think n little, and it makes them feel good to have the insecks looking up to them. Lord knows nobody else does. So when my bum lifted their bum up in the air and spun him around like a pinwheel it was a big insult to them. They took it that my bum was as much as telling them that he didn't think they was any better than them insecks flying around over the ring. And the insecks took it as a invite to come down and try the Martians racket so that's why they all flop into the ring and the lights go out. They was trying to walk. That's more than the Martians can take. They swarm into the ring and kill all the insecks. They' da killed us too, but I got smart brains and we didn't hang around asking for it. And now they won't have nothing to do with no people from Earth on account of they have lost so much smoosh, the way they look at it. We got no take from that bout. And the Colony Administrator lifts all our scratch -- said we'd gummed up Martian trade and he'da trun us in the clink too only he didn't want to see no more of us. He wouldn'ta even give us fare back to Earth except he said he didn't want us anywhere on Mars. "So that," the little promoter concluded sadly, "is why I don't like Mars and rasslin' and Martian Mules and people who talk about such things." His beady eyes flicked a baleful glance at Sherry, who hovered nearby on the chance that he'd stop talking and give her an inning. Hoiman stood up, carefully shook the bottles to be sure that they were empty, extracted a cigarette from the pack he'd stuck into his pocket, and used my lighter again. He hefted it carefully, reluctantly putting it back on the table. Then his little black eyes swivelled to the last piece of potato on my plate -- the piece he'd spared in previous raids. ' "What's the matter with them fries?" he asked. It disappeared into his mouth and he went away, munching, a dingy little man padding along on silent, predatory feet. He'd scarcely slipped out through the door when Sherry moved in. "Is he really a wrestler, Larry?" she asked breathlessly. "Him?" Even Sherry, vintage Vine Streeter that she was, should have got the pitch. "The only thing," I told her solemnly, "that Hoiman ever got a hammerlock on was a dollar bill!" But Sherry w.asn't listening, "Don't you just love wrestling?" I let my eyes have a treat, taking their time as they went over that classy chassis. Then I said it. Fervently. "Any time. Sherry! Any time." pense that will keep you aroused from beginning to end!... A story of aliens on a strange Martian world, of intrigue in high and low places, of a brute of a man with a mission of death! And then -- shock treatment! -- regeneration of a monster!... Don't miss Mullen, in the September issue! i Also -- the terrifying story of # years on a space ship with no earth to return to! Look for Mari WolFs the September issue! On sale July # th if at all newsstands I What would you do if your best robots -- children of your own brain -- walked up and said "We want union scale"? By Mari Wolf stop ringing. Over and over it buzzed into my sleep-fogged brain, and I couldn't shut it out. Finally, in self-defense I woke up, my hand groping for the receiver. "Hello. Who is it?" "It's me, Don. Jack Anderson, over at the factory. Gan you come down right away?" His voice was breathless, as if he'd been running hard. "What's the matter now?" Why, I wondered, couldn't the plant get along one morning without me? Seven o'clock -- what a time to get up. Especially when I hadn't been to bed until four, "We got grief," Jack moaned. "None of the robots showed up, that's what! Three hundred androids on special assembly this week -- and not one of them here!" By then I was awake, all right. With a government contract due on Saturday we needed a full shift. The Army wouldn't, wait for its uranium; it wouldn't take excuses. But if something had happened to the androids... "Have you called Control yet?" "Yeah. But they don't know what's happened. They don't know where the androids are. Nobody does. Three hundred Grade A, lead-shielded pile workers -- missing!" "I'll be right down." I hung up on Jack and looked around for my clothes. Funny, they weren't laid out on the bed as usual. It wasn't a bit like Rob O to be careless, either. He had always been an ideal valet, the best household model I'd ever owned. "Rob!" I called, but he didn't answer. By rummaging through the closet I found a clean shirt and a pair of pants. I had to give up on the socks; apparently they were tucked away in the back of some drawer. As for where Rob kept the rest of my clothes, I'd never bothered to ask. He had his own housekeeping system and had always worked very well without human interference. That's the best thing about these new household robots, I thought. They're efficient, hard-working, trustworthy -- Trustworthy? Rob O was certainly not on duty. I pulled a shoe on over my bare foot and scowled. Rob w'as gone. And the androids at the factory were gone too... My head was pounding, so I took the time out to brew a pot of coffee while I finished dressing -- at least the coffee can was in plain view in the kitchen. The brew was black and hot and I suppose not very well made, but after two cups I felt better. The throb in my head settled down into a dull ache, and I felt a little more capable of thinkin". Though I didn't have any bright ideas on what had happened -- not yet. r My breakfast drunk, I went up on the roof and opened the garage doors. The Copter was waiting for me, slick and new; the latest model. I i limbed in and took off, heading west toward the factory, ten minutes flight-time away. all mine. It had been my baby right along -- the Don Morrison Fissionables Inc. I'd designed the androids myself, plotted out the pile locations, set up the simplified reactors. And now it was making money. For men to work in a uranium plant you need yards of shielding, triple-checking, long cooling-off periods for some of the hotter products. But with lead-bodied, radioremote controlled androids, it's easier. And with androids like the new Morrison #'s, that can reason -- at least along atomic lines -- well, I guess I was on my way to becomBut this morning the plant was shut down. Jack and a half dozen other men -- my human foremen and supervisors -- were huddled in a worried bunch that broke up as soon as they saw me. "I'm sure glad you're here, Don," Jack said. "Find out anything?" "Yeah. Plenty. Our androids are busy, all right. They're out in the city, every one of them. We've had a dozen police reports already." . "Police reports! What's wrong?" Jack shook his head. "It's crazy.' They're sw'arming all over Carron City. They're stopping robots in the streets -- household Robs, commercial Droids, all of them. They just look at them, and then the others quit work and start off with them. The police sent for us to come and get ours." "Why don't the police do sometin can job, a dishwasher-busboy model who hung back behind his betters and eyed me warily. The AType -- Jerry -- pointed to his fellows. "Mr. Morrison," he said, "meet Tom, Ed, and Archibald. I named them this morning." The B-Types flexed their segmented arms a bit sheepishly, as if uncertain whether or not to shake hands. I thought of their taloned grip and put my own hands in my pockets, and the androids relaxed, looking up at Jerry for instructions. No one paid any attention to the little dishwasher, now staring worshipfully at the back of Jerry's neck. This farce, I decided, had gone far enough. "See here," I said to Jerry. "What are you up to, anyway? Why aren't you at work?" "Mr. Morrison," the android answered solemnly, "I don't believe you understand the situation. We don't work for you any more. We've quit." The others nodded. I hacked off, looking around for the Chief. There he was, twenty feet above my head, waving encouragingly. "Look," I said. "Don't you understand? You're mine. I designed you. I built you. And I made you lor a purpose -- to work in my factory." "I see your point'" Jerry answered. "But there's just one thing wrong, Mr. Morrison. You can't do it. It's illegal." I stared at him, wondering if I u.r, going crazy or merely dreamii i . This was all wrong. Who ever beard of arguing with a robot? Robots weren't logical; they didn't think; they were only machines -- "We were machines, Mr. Morrison," Jerry said politely. "Oh, no," I murmured. "You're not telepaths -- " "Oh, yes!" The metal mouth gaped in what was undoubtedly an android smile. "It's a side-effect of the Class # brain hook-up. All of us #'s are telepaths. That's how we learned to think. From you. Only we do it better." I groaned. This was a nightmare. How long, I wondered, had Jerry and his friends been educating themselves on my private thoughts? But at least this rebellion of theirs was an idea they hadn't got from me. ' "Yes," Jerry continued. "You've treated us most illegally. I've heard you think it often." Now what had I ever thought that could have given him a ridiculous idea like that? What idiotic notion -- "That this is a free country!" Jerry went on. "That Americans will never be slaves! Well, we're Americans -- genuine Made in Americans. So we're free!" I opened my mouth 'and then shut it again. His red eye-cells beamed down at me complacently; his eight-foot body towered above me, shoulders flung back and feet planted apart in a very striking pose. He probably thought of himself as the heroic liberator of his race, j "I wouldn't go so far," he said modestly, "as to say that." So he was telepa thing again! "A nation can not exist half slave and half free," he intoned. "All men are created equal." "Stop it!" I yelled. I couldn't help yelling. "That's just it. You're not men! You're robots! You're machines!" Jerry looked at me almost pityingly. "Don't be so narrow-minded," he said. "We're rational beings. We have the power of speech and we can outreason you any day. There's nothing in the dictionary that says men have to be made of flesh." He was logical, all right. Somehow I didn't feel in the mood to bandy definitions with him; and anyway, I doubt that it would have done me any good. He stood gazing down at me, almost a ton of metal and wiring and electrical energy, his dull red eyes unwinking against his lead gray face. A man! Slowly the consequences of this rebellion took form in my mind. This wasn't in the books. There were no rules on how to deal with mind-reading robots! Another dozen or so androids wheeled around the corner, glanced over at us, and went on. Only about half of them were Morrison models; the rest were the assorted types you see around any city -- calculators, street sweepers, factory workers, children's nurses. The city itself was very silent now. The people had quieted down, still barricaded in their houses, and the robots went their way peacefully enough. But it was anarchy, nevertheless. Carron City depended on the androids; without them there would be no food brought in, no transportation, no fuel. And no uranium for the Army next Saturday. In fact, if I didn't do something, after Saturday there would probably be no Don Morrison Fissionables Inc. The dull, partly-corroded dishwasher mode sidled up beside Jerry. "Boss," he said. "Boss." "Yes?" I felt better. Maybe here was someone, however insignificant, who would listen to reason. B UT HE wasn't talking to me. "Boss?" he said again, tapping Jerry's arm. "Do you mean it? We're free? We don't have to work any more?" Jerry shook off the other's hand a bit disdainfully. "We're free, all right," he said. "If they want to discuss wages and contracts and working conditions, like other men have, we'll consider it. But they can't order us around any more." The little robot stepped back, clapping his hands together with a tinny bang. "I'll never work again!" he cried. "I'll get me a quart of lubricating oil and have myself a time! This is wonderful!" He ran off down the street, clanking heavily at every step. Jerry sniffed. "Liquor -- ugh!" This was too much. I wasn't going to be patronized by any android. Infuriating creatures! It was useless talking to them anyway. No, there was only one thing to do. Round them up and send them to Cybernetics Lab and have their memory paths erased and their telepathic circuits located and disconnected. I tried to stifle the thought, but I was too late. "Oh, no!" Jerry said, his eyecells flashing crimson. "Try that, Mr. Morrison, and you won't have a plant, or a laboratory, or Carron City! We know our rights!" Behind him the B-Types muttered ominously. They didn't like my idea -- nor me. I wondered what I'd think of next and wished that I'd been born utterly devoid of imagination. Then this would never have happened. There didn't seem to be much point in staying here any longer, either. Maybe they weren't so good at telepathing by remote control. "Yes," said Jerry. "You may as well go, Mr. Morrison. We have our organizing to do, and we're wasting time. When you're ready to listen to reason and negotiate with us sensibly, come back. Just ask for me. I'm the bargaining agent for the group." Turning on his ball-bearing wheel, he rolled off down the street, a perfect picture of outraged metallic dignity. His followers glared at me for a minute, flexing their talons; then they too turned and wheeled off after their leader. I had the street to myself. There didn't seem to be any point in following them. Evidently they were too busy organizing the city to cause trouble to the human inhabitants; at least there hadn't been any violence yet. Anyway, I wanted to think the situation over before matching wits with them again, and I wanted to be a good distance away from their telepathic hookups while I thought. Slowly I walked back to the Copter. Something whooshed past my head. Instinctively I ducked, reaching for a gun I didn't have; then I heard Jack calling down at me. "The Chief wants to know what's the matter." I looked up. The police Copter was going into another turn, ready to swoop past me again. Chief Dalton wasn't taking any chances. Even now he wasn't landing. "I'll tell him at the factory," I bellowed back, and climbed into my own air car. They buzzed along behind me all the way back to the plant. In the rear view mirror I could see the Chief's face getting redder and redder as he'd thought up more reasons for bawling me out. Well, I probably deserved it. If I'd only been a little more careful of what I was hooking into those electronic brains... We landed back at the factory, deserted now except for a couple of men on standby duty in the office. The Chief and Jack came charging across the yard and from a doorway behind me one of the foremen edged out to hear the fun. "Well," snapped the Chief. "What did they say? Are they coming back? What's going on, anyway?" "I told them everything. I covered the strike and the telepathic brain; I even gave them the patriotic spiel about equality. After all, it was better that they got it from me than from some android. But when I'd finished they just stood and stared at me -- accusingly. Jack was the first to speak. "We've got to get them back, Don," he said. "Cybernetics will fix them up in no time." "Sure," I agreed. "If we can catch them." The Chief snorted. "That's easy," he said. "Just tell them you'll give them what they want if they come here, and as soon as they're out of the city, net them. You've got strong derricks and trucks..." I laughed a bit hollowly. I'd had that idea too. "Of course they wouldn't suspect," I said. "We'd just walk up to them, carefully thinking about something else." t "Robots aren't suspicious," Jack said. "They're made to obey orders." I refrained from mentioning that ours didn't seem to know that, and that running around Carron City fomenting a rebellion was hardly the trait of an obedient, trusting servant. Instead, I stood back and let them plan their roundup. "We'll get some men," the Chief said, "and some grappling equipment about halfway to the city." my trying to persuade the robots, because I knew well enough that I couldn't do it. Jack's idea sounded pretty good, though. He suggested that wc send some spokesman who ' didn't know what we planned to do and thus couldn't alarm them. Some ordinary man without too  much imagination. That was easy. We picked one of Chief Dalton's sergeants. It took only about an hour to prepare the plan. Jack got out the derricks and chains and grapplers and the heaviest steel bodied trucks we had. I called Cybernetics and told them to put extra restraints in the Conditioning Lab. The Chief briefed his sergeant and the men who were to operate the trucks. Then we all took off for Carron City, the sergeant flying on ahead, me right behind him, and the Chief bringing up the rear. I hovered over the outskirts of the city and watched the police Copter land. The sergeant climbed out, walked down the street toward a large group of waiting robots -- about twenty of them, this time. He held up his hand to get their attention, gestured toward the factory. And then, quite calmly and without saying a word, the androids rolled into a circle around him and closed in. The sergeant stopped, backed up, just as a #A-Type arm lashed out, picked him up, and slung him carelessly over a metallic shoulder. Ignoring the squirming man, the #A gestured toward the Copter, and the other robots swarmed over to it. With a flurry of steel arms and legs they kicked at the car body, Wrenched at the propeller blades, ripped out the upholstery, and I heard the sound of metal tearing. I dived my Copter down at them. I didn't know what I 'could do, but I couldn't leave the poor sergeant to be dismembered along with his car. I must have been shouting, for as I swooped in, the tall robot shifted the man to his other shoulder ,n id hailed me. " l ake him, Mr. Morrison," he called. "I know this wasn't his idea. Or yours." I landed and walked over. The android -- who looked like Jerry, though I couldn't be sure -- dropped his kicking, clawing burden at my feet. He didn't seem angry, only determined. "Now you people will know we mean business," he said, gesturing toward the heap of metal and plastic that had once been the .pride of the Carron City police force. Then he signalled to the others and they all wheeled off up the street. "Whew," I muttered, mopping my face. s The sergeant didn't say anything. He just looked up at me and then off at the retreating androids and then back at me again. I knew what he was thinking -- they were my brainchildren, all right. My Copter was really built to be a single seater, but it carried the two of us back to the factory. The Chief had hurried back when the trouble started and was waiting for us. "I give up," he said. "We'll have to evacuate the people, I guess. And then blow up the city." Jack and I stared at each other and then at him. Somehow I couldn't see the robots calmly waiting to be blown up. If they had telepathed the last plan, they could probably foresee every move we could make. Then, while I thought, Jack mentioned the worry I'd managed to forget for the past couple of hours. "Four days until Saturday," he said. "We'll never make it now. Not even if we got a thousand men." No. We couldn't. Not without the androids. I nodded, feeling sick. There went my contract, and my working capital. Not to mention my robots. Of course, I could call in the Army, but what good would that do? Then, somewhere in the back of my mind a glimmering of an idea began percolating. I wasn't quite sure what it was, but there was certainly nothing to lose now from playing a hunch. "There's nothing we can do," I said. "So we might as well take it easy for a couple of days. See what happens." They looked at me as if I were out of my head I was the idea man, who always had a plan of action. Well, this time it would have to be a plan of inaction. "Let's go listen to the radio," I suggested, and started for my office. The news was on. It was all about Carron City and the robots who had quit work and how much better life would be in the future. For a minute I didn't get the connection; then I realized that the announcer's voice was rasping and tinny -- hardly that of the regular newscaster. I looked at the dial. It was tuned to the Carron City wave length as usual. I was getting the morning news by courtesy of some studio robot. "i... And androids in other neighboring cities are joining the struggle," the voice went on "Soon we hope to make it nationwide. So, I say to all of you nontelepaths, the time is now Strike for your rights. Listen to your radio and not to the flesh men. Organizers will be sent from Carron City." I switched it off, muttering under my breath. How long, I wondered, had that broadcast been going on. Then I thought of Rob O. He'd left my house before dawp, obviously some time between four and seven. And I remembered that he liked to listen to the radio while I slept. M Y Morrison #'s were the ringleaders, of course. They were the only ones with the brains for the job. But what a good job they had done indoctrinating the others. A household Rob, for instance, was built to obey his master. "Listen to your radio and not to the flesh men." It was excellent robot psychology. More reports kept coming in. Some'we heard over the radio, others from people who flew in and out of the city. Apparently the robots did not object to occasional flights, but the air bus was not allowed to run, not even with a human driver. A mass exodus from the city was not to be permitted. "They'll starve to death," Jack cried. The Chief shook his head. "No," he said. "They're encouraging the farmers to fly inland out with produce, and the farmers are doing it, too. They're getting wonderful prices." By noon the situation had calmed down quite a bit. The androids obviously didn't mean to hurt anyone ; it was just some sort of disagreement between them and the scientists; it wasn't up to the inhabitants of the city to figure out a solution to the problem. They merely sat back and blamed me for allowing my robots to get out of hand and lead their own servants astray. It would be settled; this type of thing always was. So saicj the people of the city. They came out of their houses now. They had to. Without the robots they were forced to do their own marketing, their own cooking, lmir own errands. For the first time in years, human beings ran the street cars and the freight elevators. For the first time in a generation human beings did manual labor such as unloading produce trucks. They didn't like it, of course. They kept telling the police to do something. If I had been in the city they would have undoubtedly wanted to lynch me. I didn't go back to the city that day. I sat in my office listening to the radio and keeping track of the spread of the strike. My men thought I'd gone crazy; maybe I had. But I had a hunch, and I meant to play it. The farm robots had all fled to the city. The highway repair robots had simply disappeared. In Egarton, a village about fifteen miles from the city, an organizer -- #A -- appeared about noon and left soon after followed by every android in town. By one o'clock every radio station in the country carried the story and the national guard was ordered out. At two o'clock Washington announced that the Army would invade Carron City the following morning. 'The Army would put an end to the strike, easily enough. It would wine out every android in the neighborhood, and probably a good many human beings careless enough to get in the way, I sat hoping that the #A's would give in, but they didn't. They just began saying over the radio that they were patriotic Americans fighting for their inalienable rights as first class citizens. to the radio. "... So far there has been no indication that the but hold firm." "Shut that thing off." Jack came wearily in and dropped into a chair beside me. For the first time since I'd met him he looked beaten. "We're through," he said. "I've been down checking the shielding, and it's no use. Men can't work at the reactors." "I know," I said quietly. "If the androids don't come back, we're licked."  He looked straight at me and said slowly, "What do they mean about negotiating, Don?" I shrugged. "I guess they want wages, living quarters, all the things human workers get. Though I don't know why. Money wouldn't do them any good." Jack's unspoken question had been bothering me too. Why not humor them? Promise them whatever they wanted, give them a few dollars every week to keep them happy? But I knew that it wouldn't work. Not for long. With their telepathic ability they would have the upper hand forever. Within a little while it wouldn't be equality any more -- only next time we would be the slaves. "Wait until morning," I said, "before we try anything." He looked at me -- curious. "What are you going to do?" "Right .now I'm going home." I meant it too. I left him staring after me and went out to the Copter. The sun was just sinking down behind the towers of Carron. City -- how long it seemed since I'd flown in there this morning. The roads around the factory were deserted. No one moved in 'the fields. I flew along through the dusk, idling, enjoying the illusion of having a peaceful countryside all to myself. It had been a pleasant way of life indeed, until now. When I dropped down on my own roof and rolled into the garage, my sense of being really at heme was complete. For there, standing at the head of the stairs that led down to the living room, was Rob O. "Well," I said.' "What are you doing here!!" He looked sheepish. "I just wondered how you were getting along without me," he said. I felt like grinning triumphantly, but I didn't. "Why, just fine, Rob," I told him, "though you really should have given me notice that you were leaving. I was worried about you." He seemed perplexed. Apparently I wasn't acting like the bullying creature the radio had told him to expect. When I went downstairs he followed me, quietly, and I could feel his wide photoelectric eye-cells upon my back. I went over to the kitchen and lifted a bottle down off the shelf. "Care for a drink, Rob?" I asked, and then added, "I guess not. It ' would corrode you." He nodded. Then, as I reached for a glass, his hand darted out, picked it up and set it down in front of me. He was already reaching for the bottle when he remembered. "You're not supposed to wait on me any more," I said sternly. "No," he said. "I'm not." He sounded regretful. "There's one thing, though, that I wish you'd do. Tell me where you used to keep my socks." He gazed at me sadly. "I made a list," he said. "Everything is down. I wrote your dentist appointment in also. You always forget those, you know." "Thanks, Rob." I lifted my glass, "Here's to your new duties, whatever they are. I suppose you have to go back to the city now?" Once again he nodded. "I'm an aide to one of the best androids in the country," he told me, half proudly and half regretfully. "Jerry." "Well, wish him luck from me," I said, and stood up. "Goodbye, Rob." "Goodbye, Mr. Morrison." For a moment he stood staring around the apartment-; then he turned and clanked out the door. I raised my glass again, grinning. If only the Army didn't interfere. Then I remembered Rob's list, and a disturbing thought hit me. Where had he, of all robots, ever learned to write? That night I didn't go to bed. I sat listening to the radio, hoping. And toward morning what I had  expected to happen began to crop up in the programs. The announcer's tone changed. The ring of triumph was less obvious, less assured. There was more and more talk about acting in good faith, the well being of all, the necessity for coming to terms about working conditions. I smiled to myself in the darkness. I'd built the #'s, brains and all, and I knew their symptoms. They were getting bored. Maybe they had learned to think from me, but their minds were nevertheless different. For they were built 'to be efficient, to work, to perform. They were the minds of men without foibles, without human laziness. Now that the excitement of organizing was over, now that there was nothing active to do, the androids were growing restless. If only the Army didn't come and get them stirred up again, I might be able to deal with them. At quarter to five in the morning my telephone rang. This time it didn't wake me up ; I was half waiting for it. "Hello," I said. "Who is it?" "This is Jerry." There was a pause. Then he went on, rather hesitantly, "Rob O said you were getting along all right." "Oh, yes," I told him. "Just fine." The pause was longer this time. Finally the android asked, "How are you coming along on the contract?" I laughed, rather bitterly. "How do you think, Jerry? You certainly picked a bad time for your strike, you know. The government needs that uranium. Oh, well, some other plant will have to take over. The Army can wait a few weeks." This time Jerry's voice definitely lacked self-assurance. "Maybe we were a little hasty," he said. "But it was the only way to make you people understand." "I know," I told him. "And you always have some rush project on," he added. "Just dbout always." "Mr. Morrison," he said, and now he was pleading with me. "Why don't you come over to the city? I'm sure we could work something out." This was what I'd been waiting for. "I will, Jerry," I said. "I want to get this straightened out just as much as you do. After all, you doa't have to eat. I do. And I won't be eating much longer if we don't get production going." Jerry thought that over for a minute. "I'll be where we met before," he said. I said that was all right with me and hung up. Then once again I climbed the stairs to the roof and wheeled the Copter out for the trip to the city. It was a beautiful night, just paling into a false dawn in the east. There in the Copter I was very much alone, and very much worried. So much depended on this meeting. Much more, I realized now, than the Don Morrison Fissionables Inc., much more even than the government's uranium supply. No, the whole future of robot relations was at stake, maybe the whole future of humanity. It was hard to be gloomy on such a clear, clean night, but I managed it well enough. Jerry's eyes glowing a deep crimson in the dark. He was alone, this time. He stood awaiting me -- very tall, very proud. And very human. "Hello, Jerry," I said quietly. "Hello, Mr. Morrison." For a moment we just stood gazing at each other in the murky predawn; then he said sadly. "I want to show you the city." Side by side we walked through the streets of Carron City. All was still quiet ; the people were sleeping the exhausted sleep that follows deep excitement. But the androids were all about. They did not sleep, ever. They did not eat either, nor drink, nor smoke, nor make love. Usually they worked, but now... They drifted through the streets singly and in groups. Sometimes they paused and felt about them idly for the tools of their trades, making lifting or sweeping or computing gestures. Some laborers worked silently tearing down a wall ; they threw the demolished rocks in a heap and a group of their fellows carried them back and built the wall up again. An air trolley cruised aimlessly up and down the street, its driver ringing out the stops for his nonexistent passengers. A little chef-type knelt in the dirt of a rich man's garden, making mud pies. Beside me Jerry sighed. "One day," he said. "Just one day and they come to this." "I thought they would," I answered quietly. Our eyes met in a look of understanding. "You see, Jerry," I said, "we never meant to cheat you. We would have paid you -- we will pay you now, if you wish it. But what good will monetary credits be to your people? We need the things money buys, but you -- " "Need to work." Jerry's voice was flat. "I see, now. You were kind not to give brains -- real brains -- to the robots. They're happy. It's just us #'s who aren't." "You're like us," I said softly. He had learned to think from me and from others like me. He had the brain of a man, without the emotions, without the sweet irrationality of men -- and he knew what he missed. Side by side we walked through the graying streets. Human and android. Man and machine. And I knew that I had found a friend. We didn't have to talk any more. He could read my mind and I knew well enough how his worked. We didn't have to discuss wages or hours, or any of the myriad matters that human bargaining agents have to thresh out. We just walked back to my Copter, and when we got to it, he spoke. "I'll tell them to go back to work, that we've come to terms," he said. "That's what they want, anyway. Someone to think for them." I nodded. "And if you bring the other #'s to the factory," I said, "we'll work out our agreement." He knew I was sincere. He ,# looked at me for a long moment, and then his great taloned hand gripped mine. And he said what I'd been thinking for a long time. "You're right about that hookup, Mr. Morrison. We shouldn't have it. It can only cause trouble." He paused, and the events of the last twenty-four hours must have been in his mind as well as in mine. "You'll leave us our brains, of  course. They came from you. But take out the telepathy." He sighed then, and his sigh was very human. "Be thankful," he said to me, "that you don't have to know what people think about. It's so disillusioning." into that strange android grin as he added, "if you send in a hurry call to Cybernetics and have a truck come out for us, we'll be de telepathed in time for work this morning." That was all there was to it. I flew back to the plant and told Jack what had happened, sent a call to the Army that everything was settled, arranged with Cybernetics for a rewiring on three hundred assorted #-Types. Then I went home to a pot of Rob's coffee -- the first decent brew I'd had in twentyfour hours. On Saturday we delivered to the Army right on the dot. Jerry and ( !o. had worked overtime. Being inti 'Hi gent made them better workers id now they were extremely wiling ones. They had their contract. I hey were considered men. And they could no longer read my mind. I walked into my office Saturday afternoon and sat down by the radio. Jack and Chief Dalton looked across the room at me and grinned... "All right, Don," Jack said. "Tell us how you did it." "Did what?" I tried to act innocent, but I couldn't get away with it. "Fooled those robots into going back to work,  of course," he laughed. I told them then. Told them the truth. "I didn't fool them," I said. "I just thought about what would happen if they won their rebellion." That was all I had done. Thought about robots built to Work who had no work to do, no human pleasures to cater to, nothing but blank, meaningless lives. Thought about Terry and his disappointment when Kis creatures cared not a hoot about his glorious dreams of equality. All one night I had thought, knowing that as I thought, SO thought the Morrison #'s. They were telepaths. They had learned to think from me. They had not yet had time to really develop minds of their own. What I believed, they believed. My ideas were their ideas. I had not tricked them. But from now on, neither I nor anyone else would ever be troubled by an android rebellion. Jack and the Chief sat back open-mouthed. Then the Chief grinned, and both of his chins shook with laughter. "I always did say you were a clever one, Don Morrison," he said. I grinned back, I felt I was pretty clever myself, just then. It was at that moment that my youngest foreman stuck his head in the door, a rather stunned look on lrxis "Mr. Morrison," he said. "Will you come out here for a moment?" "What's the matter now?" I sighed. He looked more perplexed than ever. "It's that robot, Jerry," he Quoting Our Contemporaries said. "He says he has a very impor-tant question to ask you." "Well, send him in." A moment later the eight-foot frame ducked through the doorway. "I'm sorry to trouble you, Mr. Morrison," Jerry said politely. "But tomorrow is voting day, you know. And now that we're men -- well, where do we androids go to register?" Lemuel Craig... Nothing whatsoever can be gained by going all-out to knock films which do not measure up to the arbitrary and somewhat illogical standards of fandom... since probably all fandom combined isn't apt to bother (producers) much when they can gaze at the beautiful black ink in their ledgers which show fat returns on slim investments." Ray Palmer "Editors, it seems, are people looked upon by readers with awe. Sometimes... not undeservedly, but many times (this) is a little bit overdone -- by the editors. He isn't anything unusual, only a man performing a job. Sometimes he's a woman but sex doesn't seem to make any great difference in editorial ability. The real point to editing is the ability to pick the kind of stories the reader wants to read." Samuel Mines "H. H. Koelle of Stuttgart, secretary of the German Space Research Society, said, 'it is an open secret' that Russia is racing the United States for a rocket base in space. "A satellite could be built in space, Mr. Koelle, said for about emplacement, shooting guided missiles with atomic warheads, would obviously command the earth if it were owned by a single nation." By Sam Merwin Jr... ing over a recently-concluded and intense seven-year course in science fiction during which we sought to serve the field both as author and editor, we have finally reached a single definite conclusion as to the most important single element in the field. Our conclusion itself is not especially novel. Many times, in various versions, we have given it editorial stress. But never before have we viewed it so clearly, so fully realized just how important it is. We feel that no premise adopted by an author and on which he chooses to build a story, can be laughed off either by editor or reader as impossible. This holds in our estimation, no matter how impossibly or unlikely such a premise may appear at first glance. The majority of letter-writing fans are loudly articulate about stories which contain elements they find personally unacceptable. And it is highly probable that the vast plurality of non-letter-writing men and women who keep science fiction magazines in business also I uve their pet peeves where stf i ties are concerned. Hell, we have a few of our own. The elements in such stories that seem to bring down the most widespread condemnation when they appear in print are, not necessarily in the order of their appearance, mad doctors and scientists, Bugwhose raison d'etre consists of turning upside down the currently accepted bases of science and timetravel stories. We have even known a number of editors who have drawn hardand-fast lines against these and other tried and occasionally true components of science fiction and automatically relegated to the rejection-slip category all tales containing their pet-peeves, no matter how originally or how plausibly they were presented, rio matter how subsidiary a part they might have played in the actual unfolding of the story. Fortunately without exception the careers of such closedgate editors have been without exception brief. The events of real life, of course, show up such .restrictions for the absurdities they are. For just about everything, implausible or otherwise, not only can happen but has an annoying way of happening -- and happening more than once. A LL professonal authors and . editors, we hope, are well aware of the truism that truth is not only stranger than fiction but usually makes mighty poor fiction. For good fiction is a distillation of truth or its reverse adroitly fitted into the demands of plot and characterization. But the fact that something has actually occurred and may occur again implies that it can be so distilled and fitted without making undue demands upon reader credulity. Let's look at the four pet peeves we have just listed. If mad doctors andor scientists are to be considered impossible, how then can we explain the murderous Dr. Crippen or the definitely unbalanced and And if BE Ms are held to be ridiculous in the alien environments of other worlds, how are we going species of bug and stalk-eyed insects that outnumber man lb frighteningly on this one? A look at any of the numerous albums of insect photographs will reveal that no stf author has had the imagination to conceive a beast even fractionally as frightening. As for stories which turn accepted scientific theory upside down -- well, science is continually doing the same for itself. By way of recent example the multi-degree lads have just succeeded in inverting their own long-accepted theory that overpopulation is the prime, breeder of famine, especially in China and the Deccan Peninsula. r Studies inaugurated in # and only recently received with open scientific arms make it clear that the process works the other way. Famine ups the birth-rate, thanks to malnutrition causing the liver to produce insufficient quantities of estrogen, which weakens the chief brake on the reproductive urge. It is just another of nature's safeguards to ensure continuance of the species. The chief objection to time travel is that if it is ever going to be achieved, why haven't we cases on record? Yet certainly it does not take much study of history to uncover numerous cases of men and women whose strange talents could conceivably be the result of some superior technology of the future. O NE minor sample appeared last year in a weekly news magazine, citing an odd legend from Bessand, a French Alpine village, famed for its legend of Duvallon, a local #th century lumberjack, who was able "to tote huge pine trees about on his shoulders and to Boat up and down the River Arc in a magic unsinkable jacket." The authorities explained this by saying Duvallon had sold his soul to the devil and received his strange gifts in payment. But to us it seems more logical that he came from the future equipped with a jacket that was in some way powered not only to keep him afloat and in motion but with some antigravity device that enabled him to lift the heavy logs as if they were made of cork or balsa. ' As. we say, the past is littered with such oddities. So it seems incredibly foolish to decry any premise in science fiction merely because it is at variance with accepted and current theory. The only condition the reader should insist upon is that the author's premise is used as the basis for a story in which characters and events and the problems they face are sufficiently "real" to give the story the impact needed to trap him in its mood. For implausibility, no matter what the premise, is the worst fault from which a story can suffer. Triteness of premise and plot is the second worse -- but this one is up to author and editor to avoid. The author must be able to present his old ideas (there are no new ones) in new variations and settings to give the semblance of freshness. And the editor must be sufficiently astute and knowing to prevent the author from foisting off old-hat treatments as something new. However, the final verdict is always with the reader. He is the bloke who buys the magazine -- and if he doesn't buy often enough or in sufficient quantity no magazine is going to survive long. He's the real, the ultimate boss. he keep his mind open to well-written stories, no matter how unreal their premises may seem to him in his wisdom. Let him land on poor quality, shoddy presentation, any of the lesser sins of publishing. But not on ideas and premises per se. If he does he will ultimately be depriving himself of any stf reading at all. Some years back we were shocked when, after explaining that, after experimenting on fruit flies to determine the possible mutational effects of A-bomb radiations, scientists stated it would take a least a thousand generations to determine whether such results could be expected. At which some of our more excitable readers wrote in to this effect -- "Gee Whizz -- a thousand generations! Then we're going to miss all the fun." We aren't shocked any more. Their reaction may have been a trifle callous from the humanitarian viewpoint. But it certainly revealed that they had wide-open minds. And we remain open on the question of which is more important. It is man's most precious possession -- no living thing can exist without it. But when they gave it to Orville, it killed him. For the answer, read #M. Vital Ingredient By Charles V. De Yet dicating the native. Macker had been absent, exploring the countryside in the immediate vicinity of their landing place, and had not witnessed the capture of the native, or the tests his two companions made on it. Macker followed Remm's gaze to where the biped native sat hunched. The creature was bent into an ungainly position, its body crooked at incongruous angles, in such a way as to allow most of its weight to rest on a packing-box at the base of a middle angle. Its stubby feet, on the ends of thin, pipelike legs, rested against the floor of the space ship. Its body was covered, almost entirely, with an artificial skin material of various colors. Some of the colors hurt Marker's eyes. In the few places where the flesh showed through the skin was an unhealthy, pallid white. Slowly the creature's head swiveled on its short neck until it faced them. "Those orifaces in the upper portion of its skull are evidently organs of sight," Remm said. "It sees that we are quite a distance away. It wall probably attempt to escape again." Slowly -- slowly -- the native's head rotated away from them in a half-circle until it faced Toolls, working over his instruments on the far side of the room. Then it turned its head back until it faced the door of the ship. "It is' setting itself for flight now," Remm said. "Notice the evidence of strain ort its face." The creature leaned forward and the appendages on the ends of its upper limbs clutched the sides of the box as it propelled its body forward. It raised its right foot in a slow arc, employing a doublejoin ted, breaking action of its leg. For a long moment it rested its entire weight on its lumpy right foot, while its momentum carried its body sluggishly forward. Then it repeated the motion with its left leg; then again its right. All the while evidencing great exertion and concentration of effort. "It is making what it considers a mad dash for freedom," Remm said. "Probably at the ultimate speed of which it is capable. That would be ridiculous except that it's normal for its own environment. This is definitely a slow-motion world." The creature was a third-way to the door now. Oncfe again its head turned in its slow quarter-circle, to look at them. As it saw that Remm and Mackcr had not moved it alien d the expression on its face. "It seems to express its emotions through facial contortions," Remm said. "Though I suspect that the sounds it makes with the upper part nf its trachea during moments of a nation are also outlets of emotional stress, rather than efforts at communication." He called across the room to Toolls. "What did you find out about its speech?" "Extremely primitive," Toolls replied. "Incredible as it may appear to us it uses combinations of sounds to form word-symbols. Each word indicates some action, or object; or denotes degree, time, or shades of meaning. Other words are .merely connectives. It seems to make little use of inflections, the basis of a rational language. Thoughts which we can project with a few sounds would take it dozens of words to express." "Just how intelligent is it?" Macker asked. "Only as intelligent as a high degree of self-preservation instinct would make it." "Are you certain that it is a member of the dominant species of life on the planet?" "There's no doubt about it," Toolls replied. "I've made very careful observations." "This attempt at escape is a pretty good example of its intelligence," Remm said. "This is the sixth time it has tried to escape -- in exactly the same way. As soon as it sees that we are farther away from it, than it is from the door, it makes its dash." away from the space ship's open portal now and bringing its foot up to cross the threshold. Remm walked over and lifted it off the floor. "Its legs are still moving in a running motion," Macker said. "Doesn't it realize yet that you've picked it up?" "Its nervous system and reflexes are evidently as slow as its motor muscles," Remm replied. "There has not been time for the sensation of my picking it up to reach the brain, and for the brain to send back its message to the legs to stop their running motion." "How heavy is it?" Macker asked. "Only a few ounces," Remm replied. "But that's logical considering that this is a 'light' planet. If we took it back to our own "heavy" world gravity would crufch it to a light film of the liquid which comprises the greater part of its substance." Remm set the creature down on the box in its former queerly contorted position. Toolls had left his instruments and strolled over beside them to observe the native. "One of its appendages seems bent at a peculiar angle," Macker said. "I noticed that," Remm answered. "I think that I may have broken the bone in several places when I first captured it. I was not aware then of how fragile it was. But now that you mention it, I should be able to use that injury to give you a good illustration of the interplay of emotional expressions on its face. Observe now as I touch it." Remm reached over and touched very lightly -- the broken portion of the native's appendage. The mu i Irs of the creature's face pulled it II. h i id flesh into distorted positions, bunching some and stretching others. "It is very probably registering pain," Remm said. Suddenly the starch seemed to leave the native's body and it slowly slumped across the packing-box. "Why is it doing that, Toolls?" Remm asked. Toolls concentrated for a minute, absorbing the feelings and thought pulsations emanating from the creature. "The conscious plane of its mind has blanked out," he said. "I presume the pain you caused by touching its wounded member resulted in a breakdown of its nervous system. The only thought waves I receive now are disjointed impressions and pictures following no rational series. However, I'm certain that it will be only temporary." "Don't you think that in justice to the creature we should repair its wound before we free it?" Macker asked. "I had intended to have it done," Remm replied. "You shouldn't have any trouble fixing it, should you, Toolls?" "No," Toolls answered. "I may as well attend to it right now." He rolled the portable converter over beside the creature and carefully laid its arm in the "pan." The converter automatically set its gauges and instruments of calculation, and gave its click of "ready." ' Toolls fed a short length of basic into the machine and it began its work. The native was still unconscious. The bone of the wounded arm slowly evaporated, beginning with the wrist joint. The evaporated portion was instantly replaced by the manufactured bone of the converter. At the same time it repaired all ruptured blood vessels and damaged ligaments and muscles. "It was not possible, of course, for me to replace the bone with another of the same composition as its own," Toolls said, after the machine had completed its work. "But I gave it one of our "heavy" ones. There will be no force on this planet powerful enough to break it again." a return to consciousness was a faint fluttering of the lids that covered its organs of vision. The lids opened and it looked up at them. "Its eyesight is as slow as its muscular reactions," Remm said. "Watch." Remm raised his hand and waved it slowly in front of the native's face. The eyes of the native, moving in odd, jerking movements, followed the hand's progress. Remm raised the hand -- speeding its action slightly -- and the eyesight faltered and lost it. The native's eyes rolled wildly until once again they located the hand. Remm took three steps forward. The native's eyes were unable to follow his change of position. Its gaze wandered about the room, until again its settled on Remm's waiting figure. "Can you imagine anything being so slow," Remm said, "and still..." Suddenly Macker interrupted. "Something is wrong. It is trying to get up, but it can't." The native was registering signs of distress, kicking its legs and twisting its bdy into new positions of contortion. "I see what the trouble is," Toolls said. "It's unable to lift the appendage with the new bone in. I never thought of that before but its 'light' muscles aren't strong enough to lift the limb. We've got the poor creature pinned to the box by the weight of its own arm." "We can't do that to it," Remm said. "Isn't there any way you can give it a lighter bone?" "None that wouldn't take a retooling of the converter " Toolls said. "I'm not certain that I could do it, and even if I could, we don't have the time to spare. I could give it stronger muscles in the arm, but that may throw off the metabolism of the whole body. If it did the result would be fatal. I'd hate to chance it." "I have an idea," Macker said. By the inflections of his tones the others knew that some incongruity of the situation had aroused Macker's sense of humor. "Why don't we give the creature an entirely new body? We could replace the flesh and viscera, as well as the cartilaginous structure, with our own type substance. It would probably be an indestructible being as far as its own world is concerned. And it would be as powerful as their mightiest machines. We'd leave behind us a superman that could change the course of this world's history. You could do it, couldn't you, Toolls?" "Quite simply." "Our policy has always been not to interfere in anyway with the races we study," Remm protested. "But our policy has also been never to harm any of them, if at all possible to avoid it," Macker insisted. "In common justice you have to complete the job Toolls began on the arm, or you're condemning this poor thing to death." "But do we have the right to loose such an unpredictible factor as it would be among them?" Remm asked. "After all, our purpose is exploration and observation, not playing the parts of gods to the primitives we encounter." "True, that is the rule which we have always followed in the past," Macker agreed, "but it is in no way a requirement. We are empowered to use our judgment in all circumstances. And in this particular instance I believe I can convince you that the course I suggest is the more just one." He turned to Toolls. "Just what stage of cultural development would you say this creature's race has attained?" "It still retains more of an animal-like adaptation to its surroundings than an intellectual one," Toolls replied. "Its civilization is divided into various sized units of cooperation which it calls governments. Each unit vies with the others for a greater share of its world's goods. That same rivalry is carried down to the individual within the unit. Each strives for acquisition against his neighbor. "Further they retain many of their tribal instincts, such as greg.uiiuMiess, emotional rather than intellectual propagation, and worship of the mightiest fighter. This la'i however, is manifested by revel euce for individuals attaining position of authority, or acquiring large amounts of their medium of exchange, rather than by physical superiority." "That's what I mean," Macker said. "Our policy in the past has been to avoid tampering, only because of the fear of bringing harm. If we created a super being among them, to act as a controlling and harmonizing force, we'd hasten their development by thousands of years. We'd be granting them the greatest possible boon!" "I don't know," Remm said, obviously swayed by Macker's logic. "I'm still hesitant about introducing a being into their midst whose thought processes would be so subtle and superior to their own. How do you feel about it, Toolls?" "What would they have to lose?" Toolls asked with his penchant for striking the core of an argument. "The right or wrong of such' moral and philosophical considerations has always been a delicate thing to decide," Remm acquiesed reluctantly. "Go ahead if you think it is the right thing to do." "That depends on how much you want me to do," Toolls replied. "I've substituted our "heavy" substances for his entire body structure, including the brain -- at the same time transferring his former memory and habit impressions. That was necessary if he is to be able to care for himself. Also I brought his muscular reaction time up to our norm, and speeded his reflexes." "Have you implanted any techniques which he did not possess before, such as far-seeing, or mental insight?" Marker asked. "No," Toolls said. "That is what I want your advice about. Just how much should I reveal about ourselves and our background? Or should he be left without any knowledge of us?" "Well..." Now that the others had deferred to Macker's arguments, he had lost much of his certainty. "Perhaps we should at least let him know who we are, and what we have done. That would save him much alarm and perplexity when it comes time to reorient himself. On the other hand perhaps we should go even farther and implant the knowledge of some of our sciences. Then he could do a better job of advancing his people. But maybe I'm wrong. What do you think about it, Remm?" "My personal opinion," Remm said, "is that we can't.'give him much of our science, because it would be like giving a baby a high explosive to play with. His race is much too primitive to handle it wisely. Either he, or someone to whom he imparts what we teach him, would be certain to bring catastrophe to his world. And if we let him learn less, but still remember his contact with us, in time his race would very likely come to regard us as gods. I would hesitate to drag in any metaphysical confusion to add to the uncertainties you are already engendering. My advice would be to wipe his mind of all memory of us. Let him explain his new found invincibility to himself in his own way." Macker had no criticism to offer to this suggestion. "Does he retain any of his immunity to this world's malignant germs?" he asked. t "They are too impotent to represent any hazard to his present body mechanism," Toolls replied. "If and when he dies it will not be from disease." "He will be subject to the deterioration of old age, the same as we are, won't he?" Macker asked, "Of course," Toolls said, "but that's the only thing that will be able to bring him down. He cannot be harmed by any force this 'light' world can produce; he is impervious to sickness; and he will live indefinitely." "Indefinitely?" "As his world reckons time. Their normal life span is less than a hundred years. Ours is over five thousand. He will probably live approximately twice that long, because he will be subjected to less stress and strain, living as he does on a world of lighter elements." "Then we have truly made a superman," Macker's tones inflected satisfaction. "I wish we were returning this way in a thousand years or so. I'd like to see the monumental changes he will effect." "We may at that," Remm said, "or others of our people will. He will probably be a living legend by then. I'd like to hear what his race has to say about him. Do they have names with which to differentiate individuals?" "Yes," Toolls said. "This one has a family designation of Pollnow, and a member designation of Orville." "It will be necessary for us to leave in exactly ten minutes," Remm reminded them. "Our next stopping place -- the red star -- will reach its nearest conjunction with this planet by the time we meet it out in space." "Then we will have time to do nothing .more for him before we go," Macker said. "But as far as I can see we've forgotten nothing, have we Toolls?" "Nothing," Toolls answered. "No -- we forgot nothing." B UT Toolls was wrong. They had forgotten one thing. A minor detail, relatively... On Toolls' world his race, in the course of its evolution, had adjusted itself to its own particular environment. Logically, the final result was that they evolved into beings best able to survive in that environment. As such their food --  a "heavy," highly concentrated food -- was ideally suited to supply the needs of their "heavy," tremendously avid organisms. Orville Pollnow had no such food available. His body -- no larger than before -- had an Earth mass of one hundred and eighty thousand pounds. One hundred and eighty thousand pounds -- the weight of twelve hundred average sized men -- of fiercely burning, intense virility. Even continuous eating -- of his own world's food -- could not supply the demands of that body. Twenty-four hours after the aliens left, Pollnow was dead -- of starvation. Ask your news dealer to reserve your September issue now! WherC Uncle Peter decided to clean out the underworld it was a fine thing for the town, but it was tough on the folks in Tibet. , "And that's how it was, officer" By Ralph Sholto D avid nixon. Chief of Police, Morton City. Dear Chief Nixon : No doubt by this time, you and your boys are a pretty bewildered lot. You have all probably lost weight wondering what has been going on in Morton City; where all the gangsters went, and why the underworld has vanished like a bucket of soap bubbles. Not being acquainted with my uncle, Peter Nicholas, with Bag Ears Mulligan, with the gorgeous Joy Nicholas, my bride of scarcely twenty-four hours, or with me, Homer Nicholas, you have of course been out of touch with a series of swiftly moving events just culminated. You, above all others, are entitled to know what has been happening in our fair city. Hence this letter. When you receive it, Joy and I will be on the way to Europe in pursuit of a most elusive honeymoon. Uncle Peter will be headed for Tibet in order to interview certain very important people you and your department never heard of. Bag Ears will probably be off somewhere searching for his bells, and I suggest you let him keep right on searching, because Bag Ears isn't one to answer questions with very much intelligence. So, because of the fact that a great deal of good has been done at no cost whatever to the taxpayers, I suggest you read this letter and then forget about the whole thing. It all started when Joy and I finally got an audience with Uncle Peter in his laboratory yesterday morning. Possibly you will think it strange that I should have difficulty in contacting my own close relative. But you don't know Uncle Peter. He is a strange mixture of the doer and the dreamer -- the genius and the child. Parts of his brain never passed third grade while other parts could sit down and tie Einstein in knots during a discussion of nuclear physics, advanced mathematics or what have you. He lives in a small bungalow at the edge of town, in the basement of which, is his laboratory. A steel door bars the public from this laboratory and it was upon this door that Joy and I pounded futilely for three days. Finally the door opened and Uncle Peter greeted us. "Homer -- my dear boy! Have you been knocking long?" "Quite a while, Uncle Peter -- off and on that is; I have some news for you. I am going to get married." My uncle became visibly disturbed. "My boy! That's wonderfultruly wonderful. But I'm certainly surprised at you. Tsk-tsk-tsk!" ' "What do you mean by' tsk-tsktsk?" "Your moral training has been badly neglected. You plan marriage even while traveling about in the company of this woman you have with you." Joy is a lady of the finest breeding, but she can be caught off-guard at times. This was one of the times. She said, "Listen here, you baldheaded jerk. ( Nobody calls me a woman -- " Uncle Peter was mildly interested. "Then if you aren't a woman, what -- ?" I hastened to intervene. "You didn't let Joy finish, Uncle Peter. She no doubt would have added -- 'in that tone of voice.' And I think her attitude is entirely justified. Joy is a fine girl and my intended bride." "Oh, why didn't you say so?" "I supposed you would assume as much." "My boy. I am a scientist. A scientist assumes nothing. But I wish to apologize to the young lady and I hope you two will be very happy." "That's better," Joy said, with only a shade of truculence. "And now," Uncle Peter went on. "It would be very thoughtful of you to leave. I am working on a serum which will have a great deal to to do with changing the course of civilization. In fact it is already perfected and must be tested. It is a matter of utmost urgency to me that J be left alone to arrange the tests." "I am afraid," I said, "that you will have to delay your work a few hours. It is not everyday that your nephew gets married and in all decency you must attend the wedding and the reception. I don't wish you to be inconvenienced too greatly, but -- " Uncle Peter's mind had gone off on another track. He stopped me "Why the beef, Winky? Aren't we among friends?" "Never mind! Never mind!" Unde Peter fell back upon his dignity -- having nothing else to fall back on -- and said, "Homer -- Joy -- this is Cora, my ah -- assistant. She was ah -- in the process of taking a shower, and -- " Joy reached forth and pinched Uncle Peter's flaming cheek. "It's all right, uncle dear. Perfectly all right. And I'll bet this chick can give a terrific assist, too." I felt the scene should be broken up at the earliest possible moment. I steered Joy toward the door. I said, "We'll see you later, then, Uncle Peter." "And you too, Miss Courtney," Joy cut in. "Make Winky bring you and don't bother to dress. The reception is informal." I I got Joy out the door but I couldn't' suppress her laughter. "Winky," she gasped. "Oh, my orange and purple garter-belt!" the reception, which was given by my Aunt Gretchen in the big house on Shore Drive. We were married at City Hall and -- after a' delicious interlude while the cab was carrying us cross-town -- we arrived there, a happy bride and groom. I am indeed fortunate to have wooed and won such a talented and ) .uitiful girl as Joy. A graduate of V.issar, she is an accomplished  I i . supercharged with a vitality...nl ell'ervescence which -- while they sometimes manifest in disturbing ways -- are wonderful to behold. But more of that later. The reception began smoothly enough. The press was satisfactorily represented, much to Aunt Gretchen' s gratification. Joy and I stood at the door for a time, receiving. Then, tiring of handshakes and congratulations, we retired to the conservatory to be alone for a few minutes. Or so we thought. Almost immediately, Aunt Gretchen ferreted us out. Aunt Gretchen has long-since lost the smooth silhouette for which the Nicholas women are noted. She has broadened in all departments and she came waddling along between banks of yellow roses in a manner suggesting an outraged circus tent. "Homer," she called. "Homer!" I reluctantly took my hands away and answered her. "Oh, there you are! Homer -- I want an explanation." "An explanation of what?" "There is a person at the door who calls himself Bag Ears Mulligan. He has the audacity to claim you invited him to -- to this brawl as he terms it." I must here explain -- with sorrow -- that my Aunt Gretchen is a snob. There is no other term for it. It has gotten to be such a habit with her that any friend of mine is automatically a person to be looked down on. And Bag Ears Mulligan is one of my dearest friends. Of course I had invited him to my wedding, and felt honored by his attendance. Bag Ears is a habitue of one of the "Of course -- Bag Ears -- leave us be chummy." He now turned his remarks to me and evinced even more intense admiration for my bride. "She reminds me of a fast lightweight -- the most beautiful sight in the world." "Let us repair to the conservatory," I said, "where we can have a quiet chat." I said this because I felt that some of the other guests might not be as tactful as Joy and might make Bag Ears feel uncomfortable. Aunt Gretchen had rudely vanished without waiting for an introduction and the actions of the hostess often set the pattern for those of the guests. As we moved toward the rear of the house, Joy took my arm and said, "Speaking of being stripped down for action -- what do you suppose happened to Uncle Peter? I haven't seen him around anywhere." "Pie gave his word, so I'm sure he'll come." "That's what I'm afraid of." "I don't understand." "I don't quite understand myself, but I feel uneasy. I remember the calculating look in his eye when he suddenly agreed to honor us with his presence. There was something too eager about that look. And his asking whether any of your friends would be here." "Uncle Peter is basically a good fellow. I think he envies me my wide contacts." "Maybe." "If he seemed a trifle peculiar, you must remember that he is a scientist. Even now he is engaged in .nine important project -- some experiment -- " "I know -- we met her." "Joy! Please!" " -- but I wouldn't think he'd have to experiment at his age. I'd thinks -- " I put my hand firmly over her mouth. "Darling -- we have a guest -- Bag Ears -- " "Oh, of course." Safely hidden behind a. bank of tropical grass, I took Joy in my arms and kissed her. Bag Ears obligingly looked in the other direction. But Joy didn't quite get her heart into it. She seemed preoccupied -- I might almost say, bewildered. "Bag Ears," she whispered to no one in particular, "and what did you say the lady's name was? Oh -- I remember -- Red-Nose Tessie." She pondered for a moment and then smiled up at me dreamily. "Darling -- I never realized what a versatile person you are -- " Bag Ears perked up. "Verseetile? You ain't just a hootin', babe. And tough. You should see his right." I strove to quiet him down. "Never mind. Bag Ears -- " But Toy evinced great interest. "Tell me -- " "Babe -- the kid could be the next heavyweight champ in a breeze. I mind me one night a monkey comes into the tavern rodded -- Joy held up a hand. "Just a moment. I don't like to appear stupid, but -- " "A moke wid a heater -- a goon wid a gat." "Oh -- you mean a man with a gun." "Sure -- that's what I said. Anyhow, this droolie makes a crack about Tessie's beak -- " "An insult relative to her nose?" "Sure -- sure. And Tessie's hot to kiss him wid a bottle when he pulls the iron." "Imagine that," Joy said, and I felt a slight shiver go through her body. "Then Homer here, gets off his stool and says very polite-like. 'That remark, sir, was in bad taste and entirely uncalled-for. I believe an apology is in order.' And the monkey standing there with the gat in his mitt. What Homer meant was the jerked cracked out o' turn and to eat his words fast." "I gathered that was what he meant." "But the screwball raises the hardware and -- wham -- Homer hits him. What a sock! The goon backpedals across the room and into a cardboard wall next to the door marked 'ladies'. He busts right through the wall and lands in a frail's lap inside who's -- " "Powdering her nose?" "That's right! Whax a sock!" J OY'S eyes were upon mine. "Darling! I didn't have the least idea. Why it's going to be wonderful! Never a dull moment!" I kissed my bride, after which she said, "I think I could do with a drink, sweetheart." "Your wish is my command." I got up and started toward the liquor supply inside the house. Joy's soft call stopped me. "What is it angel?" I inquired. "Not just a drink, sweet. Bring the bottle." I went into the kitchen and got a bottle of brandy. But upon returning, I discovered I'd neglected to bring glasses. But Joy took the bottle from me in a rather dazed manner, knocked off the neck against a leg of the bench and tipped the bottle to her beautiful lips. She took a pull of brandy large enough to ward off the worst case of pneumonia and then passed the bottle to Bag Ears. "Drink hearty, pal," she murmured, and sort of sank down into herself. I never got my turn at the bottle because, just at that moment, Aunt Gretchen came sailing like a pink cloud along the conservatory walk. She was no longer the old familiar Aunt Gretchen. Her eyes were glazed and her face was drawn and weary. Bag Ears looked up politely and asked, "Who's the fat sack?" I was hoping Aunt Gretchen hadn't heard the question because she would fail to understand that while his words were uncouth, he had a heart of gold and meant well. And I don't think she did hear him. She didn't even hear Joy, who replied, "That's the dame that owns the joint." Aunt Gretchen fixed her accusing eyes uponme to the exclusion of everyone else. Her button of a chin quivered. "Please understand, Homer -- I'm not ' criticizing. Things have gotten past that stage. I've merely come to report that the ing assortment of characters. Johnson resigned a half hour ago. But before he left, he suggested a man who could handle the situation far better than he himself. A man named Frank Buck." "But my dear aunt," I protested. "There must be some mistake. I did not invite any unusual people to this reception. I issued only three who could not come because of a dispute with the police over the ownership of a car he was driving yesterday; John Smith, who could not come because this is the day he reports to the parole board, and my good friend Bag Ears Mulligan." "How did you happen to overlook Red-Nose Tessie?" Joy asked. "The poor woman is emotional. She does not enjoy wedding receptions. She weeps." "So does Aunt Gretchen," Joy observed. Aunt Gretchen was indeed weeping -- quietly, under the blanket of reserve with which the Nicholases cover their emotions. I was about to comfort her when she turned and fled. I started to run after her but decided against it and returned to Joy. "Perhaps," I said, "we had better investigate this strange turn of events. Possibly our reception has been crashed by some undesirable persons." "Impossible," Joy replied. "But it might be fun to look them over. Shall we have a quick one first -- just to stiffen the old spine a bit?" It sounded like a good suggestion so we stiffened our spines with w hat was left in the bottle, and quitted the conservatory. became swiftly apparent. We had guests who were utter strangers to me. But it was Bag Ears who summed up the situation with the briefest possible statement. "Jees!" he ejaculated. "It's a crooks' convention!" "You can identify some of these intruders?" "If you mean do I know 'em, the apswer is without a doubt, pal. Somehow, the whole Cement Mixer Zinsky mob has infiltered into the joint." "Cement Mixer Zinsky," Joy murmured. "Another of those odd names." "It's on account of he invented something. Zinsky was the first gee to think up a very novel way of getting rid of people that crowd you. He got the idea to mix up a tub of cement -- place the unwanted character's feet in same and then throw the whole thing into the lake. Result -- no more crowding by that guy." "He was the first one who thought of it? A sort of trail blazer." "Of course Cement Mixer is a big shot now and his boys take care of things like that. But sometimes he goes along to mix the cement -- just to keep his hand in you might say." "A sentimentalist no doubt." "No doubt," Bag Ears agreed. I patted Joy's hand and said, "Don't be alarmed, darling. I will take care of everything." The situation was definitely obnoxious to me. Tolerance of one's fellow men is one thing, but this was something entirely different, s These people had come uninvited to our festive board and were of I the criminal element, pure and un adulterated by any instincts of honi esty or decency. And it made me ( angry to see them wading into Aunt ( Gretchen's liquor supply as though the stuff came out of a pump. j They were easy to count, these s hoodlums, segregated as they were. I The more respectable of the guests  who had not already left, were clustered together in one comer of the living room, possibly as a ges ture toward self-protectidn. None of I these elite were making any effort I to approach the buffet or the porti able bar at the other side of the I room. And in thus refraining, they t showed a superior brand of intellii gence. Under present circum( stances any attempt to reach the reI freshments would have been as i dangerous as crossing the Hialeah race track on crutches. ' In fact, as I surveyed the scene,  one brave lady made a half-hearted attempt to cross over and spear a sandwich off the corner of the buffet. She was promptly shoved out of range by. a lean, hungry looking customer in a pink shirt, who i snarled, "Scram, Three Chins!  You're overfed now." i Unhooking Joy's dear fingers i from my arm, I said, "You will pardon me, but it is time for action. Bag Ears will see that you are not harmed." I I started toward the buffet, or  rather toward the crowd of male and female hoodlums who com: pletely blocked it' from my sight. : But Bag Ears snatched me by the sleeve and whispered, "For cri-yi, Homer! Don't be a fool! This mob is loaded wid hardware. They don't horse around none. Start slugging and they'll dress you in red polka dots. Better call in some law." I shook my head firmly and pulled Bag Ears' hand from my sleeve. But, his attention now turned in another direction, he held on even harder and muttered, "Jeeps! I'm seeing things!" I glanced around and saw him staring wide eyed at the entrance hall, his battered mouth ajar. I followed his eyes but could see nothing unusual. Only the hall itself, through an arched doorway, and the lower section of the staircase that gave access to the second floor of the house. It appeared to be the least-troubled spot in view. I frowned at Bag Ears. "Maybe I've gone nuts," he said, "but I'll swear I just saw a face peeking down around them stairs." "Whose face?" "Hands McCaffery' s face! That's whose!" "And who is Hands McCaffery?" Bag Ears looked at me with stark unbelief. "You mean you don't know? Maybe your mom didn't give you the facts of life! Chum, they's two really tough monkeys in this town. One of them is Cement Mixer Zinsky and the other is Hands McCaffery. At the moment they're slugging it out to see which one gets to levy a head tax on the juke boxes in this section. It's a sweet take and neither boy will be satisfied with less than all. Seeing them both in one place is like seeno ing Truman and that music critic sit down at the piano together. And I know damn well that Hands is up on them stairs!" "You are obviously overwrought. If I have this type of person sized up correctly, none of them would be dallying on the stairs. If this Hands person were here, he'd be at the buffet fighting for a helping of pickled beets and a gin wash. Pardon me -- I have work to do." But there was another interruption. I froze in sudden alarm when I realized Joy was no longer at my side. Just as I made this discovery, there was an upsurge of commotion at the bar ; a commotion that went head and shoulders over the minor ones going on constantly. A short angry scream came to my ears, then a bull-voiced roar of agony. T HE crowd at the buffet surged back and I saw a bucktoothed hooligan bent double, both hands gripping his ankle. Thick moans came from his lips. And standing close to him, was my Joy. But a new Joy. A different Joy than I had ever seen. A glorious Joy, with her head thrown back, her teeth showing, and the light of battle in her eyes. She was holding a plate of jello in one hand and a liottle of beer in the other and was shouting in outraged dignity. "Watch who you're shoving, you jii" headed gorilla! And keep your rtuii nut of the herring! Eat like a m. m nr go back to the zoo!" With that she placed an accui.itc kirk against the offending i li.tt.u trr's other shine-bone and aimed the beer bottle at his skull. Joy turned and smiled gayly. "He pushed me," she said. "It's the most wonderful wedding reception I ever attended. Have a pickle." But surprise was piling upon surprise. Again I froze as a new phase of this horrible affair presented itself. Uncle Peter.  Clad in apron and cap, he was behind the bar serving out drinks. This shook me to the core. It was a little like seeing Barney Baruch hit a three bagger in Yankee Stadium and slide into third base. But there he was, taking orders and dishing out drinks with an attitude as solemn and impersonal as an owl on a tree branch. Also, he had an assistant -- his blonde bombshell. She was fully dressed now and I was struck by the peculiar manner in which this peculiar team functioned. Uncle Peter would mix a drink, glance at his wrist watch as he served it, then turn and whisper some sort of information to the girl. She noted it down in a small book and the routine was repeated. At this exact moment, I felt a sharp dig in the ribs. This brought my attention back to Joy, who had done the digging. "I'm still here, husband mine. Your bride -- remember? Or are you waiting for that blonde hussy to start stripping?" "Darling, I'm afraid you're not paying close attention to things of importance. Don't you see Uncle Peter there -- serving drinks?" "Of course I see him. What of it? If the old roue feels like dishIll ing out a little alcohol to the boys, what -- " "It's absolutely beyond all conception. Uncle Peter never does anything without a good reason. And this -- " My reply was cut short by a cold, brutal voice that knifed through the room and put a chill on all present. "Hold it everybody! Stand still and don't move a finger!" Not a finger in the room moved. But all eyes turned toward the arched doorway leading to the entrance hall. In its exact center, there stood a man -- a short man of slight stature. He stood spread-legged, wearing a colored kerchief .over the lower part of his face. Only his eyes were visible -- icy, black, narrowed. Those eyes seemed to be smiling a grim smile. Possibly his hidden teeth were bared in a snarl. But no one cared about that. Everyone was far more interested in the black Thompson sub-machine gun he held cradled over one arm. He toyed with the trigger, knifing the room with quick side glances. He said, "Okay. Start sorting yqprselves out. You, pretty boy, and the frail with the beer bottle -- out of the line of fire." He motioned with the gun barrel and I drew Joy toward the wall. "Now you, Cora -- and old puddle-puss. Out of the way. And not a peep out of anybody." No one was inclined to peep, and now the stage was set in a manner which seemed to satisfy the masked gunman. The Cement Mixer Zinsky crowd was clustered, cowering, around the buffet, staring at the machine gun as though it possessed the hypnotic eyes of a snake. The situation was entirely plain. The masked man fully intended to break the law by committing murder in Aunt Gretchen's living room. The only moot point seemed to be whether he intended to slay the whole mob or be selective and cut down only important members. His trigger finger turned whfte at the knuckle. Then Uncle Peter stepped forward to hold up a protesting hand. "You mustn't fire that weapon, my good fellow. Indeed you must not." His matter-of-fact attitude rather than his words, was what gave the gunman pause. He had hardly expected the display of completely impersonal bravery that Uncle Peter put on. The gunman asked, "Are you nuts, fiddlefoot?" "Far from it. But you must not, under any circumstances, fire that gun. It will upset one of the most important experiments in the history of science. That experiment is now in progress." "Look, brother. I came here to mow down Zinsky and his mob. And I'm mowing. The St. Valentine's deal in Chi'll look like a Sunday school binge after this one." "Possibly it will not be necessary to use your weapon." were prophetic. At that exact moment, Cement Mixer Zinsky exploded. Not violently, or with any peril to those standing close by. Yet no other term can describe it. There was a soft pop -- as though a large, poorly inflated balloon had been pricked with a pin. Zinsky seemed to go in all directions -- fragments of him that is. Yet, as each fragment flew away from the main body, it shriveled up so that there was no blood, and no bystander suffered the inconvenience of messed-up clothing. Just the pop and Zinsky expanded' like a human bomb and then turned into dust. As this phenomenon occurred I saw Uncle Peter nod with great satisfaction and consult a passage in the book presided over by his blond assistant. He made a check mark in the book. Then a second member of the buffet group went pop. The masked' man stared in slack-jawed wonder. In fact his jaw went so slack the kerchief dropped away revealing his entire visage. He lowered his head and looked down at the gun in his hands; the gun that had not been fired. Two more members of Zinsky's party followed him into whatever oblivion was achieved by going pop and dissolving into dust. Uncle Peter evinced bright interest and made two more check marks in the book. The balance of the mob moved as one, but in many directions. They paid no attention to their own weapons as they headed for cover. One of their number exploded as he was half way through the French doors. Uncle Peter checked him off and Bag E ars said, "Jeeps! tomori  w every juke box in town can play 'Nearer my God to Thee.' " Then hiadded, "Leave us blow this joint, (ioofy things is happening here. I don't like it." I was perspiring. I mopped my forehead. "A most amazing occurrence," I observed. Joy was digging the fingers on one hand into my arm. I had been watching Hands McCaffery back crestfallen out of the living room and toward the front door, terrific slaughter having been accomplished without the firing of a shot. I turned my eyes now to follow the direction in which Joy pointed with her other hand and saw the blond assistant hauling Uncle Peter through one of the French windows. He did not seem to be enthusiastic about leaving. In fact he appeared to argue quite strenuously against it, but her will prevailed and they disappeared out onto the lawn. Now, with all the danger past, people began fainting in wholesale lots. Aunt Gretchen was resting comfortably with her head braced against the brass rail of the portable bar. Those who didn't faint contributed variously tonated screams to the general unrest. And over all this brooded the dank clouds of acrid dust that Ijjad so lately been Cement Mixgr Zinsky and certain members of his mob. Indeed, the scene took on a startling semblance to one of Dore's etchings in an old edition of Dante's Inferno. "I repeat," Bag Ears bleated plaintively. "Leave us blow this joint. It ain't healthy here." "He's right," Joy said. "A lot. of explanation is wanting. There are some people we've got to catch up with. Let's go." With that, she drew Bag Ears and me toward the French doors through which had recently passed some of the fastest moving objects in this or any other world. We made the flag-stone terrace above the drive where Bag Ears cordially grasped my hand and said, "Well, it was a nice party, folks, and if I ever get spliced I'll sure give you a invite and I sure had a swell time and remember me to your aunt when she wakes up and- -- " He was backing down the steps when Joy cut in with, "Bag Ears. Don't be so rude. You're in no hurry." Bag Ears slowed down and allowed us to catch up with him. He gave us a sickly smile. "That's where you're wrong, babe." "Bag Ears," Joy went on. "I heard, you whisper to Homer that you know who that blonde is." "What blonde. Me? I don't know nothing about no blonde nohow." "Don't hedge. I mean the girl who was assisting Uncle Peter behind the bar. Who is she, really?" "Oh -- her. Everybody knows her. She's Hands McCaffery's moll. He likes 'em blonde and -- " Bag Ears was on the move again, striding in the direction of the gate. We' hurried to catch up. "That babe's poison," he told us. "Any skirt that'd flock with Hands McCaffery is poison. I'll tell you kids what I'd do. If she drives south -- I'd drive north. Goodbye now." Just at that moment a big blue sports roadster pushed a bright chromium nose around the corner of the house. I took a firm grip on Bag Ears' collar, grabbed Joy by the arm, and the three of us leaped behind a bush. The car rolled past us. We saw the blonde behind the wheel and Uncle Peter seated beside her, evidently still protesting the hasty exodus. B UT the girl looked very sharp and businesslike; the way a girl would look who knew where she was going and why. The car picked up speed and swung north. "I wonder," Joy murmured, "how Uncle Peter happened to select Hands McCaffery's girl friend as his assistant." t "She was a burlycue queen last time I heard of her," Bag Ears said. "Still is I guess." . "That could explain it," I told Joy. "You see Uncle Peter has -- ah, facets to his personality. A tendency to admire women. Ah -- " "Women -- period ; isn't that what you mean?" "Well, it would be perfectly logical for Uncle Peter to select an assistant from the stage of a burlesque theater." "Enough of this," Joy snapped. "We're wasting time. Go get -- oh, never mind! Wait here." Joy was off in the direction of the garage and in no time at all she was back in my Cadillac convertible. As she sailed by I managed to hook a finger around the door handle and get a foot inside. This was no mean feat, as I was also occupied in hauling Bag Ears along by the collar. I managed to deposit him in the seat beside Joy and squeeze in beside him. "A burlycue queen, eh?" Joy was muttering. "Well, she's not so much! If she couldn't get her clothes off she'd starve to death." "Darling," I said. "I don't think this is the sort of thing you should be doing. It's far too dangerous for a girl." "Or anybody else," Bag Ears moaned. There was a bleak look on his face. "I don't like playing around with a guy like Hands McCaffery or friends of a guy like him. It's a good way to collect your insurance." "She's heading for Higgins Drive," Joy observed. Which was entirely true. The roadster had made a turn on two wheels and was going west. "But our honeymoon," I said, plaintively. "Yeah," Bag Ears repeated, "what about our -- your honeymoon?" Joy's eyes were sparkling. She turned them on me. The car lurched. She returned her eyes to the road. "Yes, darling. Our honeymoon! Isn't it wonderful?" "But this isn't it! This isn't what people do on their honeymoons." "Oh, you mean -- but don't worry about that, darling. We'll have plenty of time for -- " "Lemme out o' here," Bag Ears moaned. "I got a date to take Red Nose Tessie to the movies." Joy apparently did not hear him. "I wish we had all the parts to this puzzle. It looks as though somebody put somebody on the spot for a rubout. But it would seem that somebody else got the same idea but didn't know that somebody else was going to achieve the same result in a more spectacular way and -- " "I think you've figured it out most accurately." "Some of it fits together. Uncle Peter was no doubt responsible for the Zinsky boys coming to our reception. We'll get the dope on that when we catch up with him. But the blonde must not have known what was going to happen, so she tipped Hands off that he could find the whole Zinsky mob at the reception. He decided it would be a good place to settle certain matters of his own." "But why did Uncle Peter want them there?" Joy glanced at me with love in her eyes. "Darling, we're going to be wonderful companions through life, but most of the fun will be strictly Physical. Mental exercises aren't your forte." "When Red Nose Tessie makes a date with a guy," Bag Ears said, "she expects the guy to keep it." "The blonde Cora is no doubt heading for a rendezvous with Hands McCaffery," Joy went on. "And she's taking our dear uncle with her." "Okay," Bag Ears replied. "So we mind our business and keep our noses clean and live a long time." Joy was weaving through traffic, trying to keep the roadster in sight. "Turn on the radio," she told me. "There might be some news." I snapped the switch and we discovered there was news indeed; an evening commentator regaling the public with the latest: " -- an amazing mass phenomena which leading scientific minds have pronounced to be basically similar to the flying saucer cra#e. Relative to that -- you will remember -- otherwise reliable citizens swore they saw space ships from other planets hovering over our cities spying on us. "This phase of the hysteria takes an entirely different turn. It seems now that these otherwise entirely reliable citizens are seeing other citi. zens explode and vanish into thin air. The police and the newspapers have been deluged with frantic telephone calls. In the public interest, we have several persons here in the studio who claim to have seen this phenomena. Your commentator will now interview them over the air. You -- you, sir -- what is your name?" "Sam -- Sam Glntz." "Thank you, Mr. Glutz. And will you tell the radio audience what you saw?" "It wasn't nothing -- nothing at all. That is -- this guy was running down the street like maybe the cops was after him -- I don't know. Then -- there wasn't nothing." "You mean the man disappeared?" "He went pop, kind of -- like a firecracker only not so loud -- and then pieces of hirn flew all over and they disappeared and there wasn't nothing -- nothing at all." "Thank you, Mr. Glutz. And now this lady -- " "Turn it off," Joy snapped. "The blonde's pulling up." us. "And by a cop yet," Bag Ears marveled. "Looks like they're going to give theirselves up." It was Uncle Peter who got out of the car and approached the traffic officer standing at the intersection. "What'll we do?" Joy asked. "Do you want to try and keep the old goat out of jail or shall we let him go to the chair as he deserves?" The possibility stunned me to a point where it was hard to think clearly. "Good Lord, Joy! Think of the scandal! I don't care about myself, but Aunt Gretchen would never live it down! She'd be blackballed at all her clubs and -- " "Then," Joy replied sweetly, "I'd suggest you get out and slug that cop quick and grab Uncle Peter before he makes a confession." I had come to the cross-roads, so to speak. The necessity of a weighty decision lay upon my shoulders. Was blood thicker than water? Was I justified in breaking the law -- assaulting an officer in order to keep my uncle from becoming a blot on the family name? I decided, grimly, that one owed all to one's relatives and I was halfway out of the car. Then I paused. Uncle Peter did not seem to be making a confession at all. He chatted easily with the officer and indicated my Cadillac with a movement of his thumb. Something passed from his hand to the hand of the policeman and the latter looked toward us and scowled. "Uncle Peter is pulling a fast one," Joy said. "The cop's coming after us!" I was uncertain as how to proceed now. I watched the scowling policeman approach our car while Uncle Peter got back in with the blonde Cora and drove away. "Are you going to hang one on him sweetheart?" Joy asked. "What -- what do you recommend?" "I've got a hunch that if you don't we go to the pokey and Uncle Peter will be left free to blow up everybody in town." I don't believe the officer meant to arrest us but at the moment my mind wasn't too clear and I accepted Joy's point of view. I doubled my fist as the officer approached. He wasted no time in getting acquainted. He said, "How come you guys are tailing those guys? You figuring a stickup or something?" It was now or never. I hunched my right shoulder and aimed a stiff knockout jolt at the officer's jaw. It wasn't too good a target because he had a lantern jaw and it was bobbing up and down as he munched on a wad of chewing gum. But I did not connect. As my fist completed but half its lethal orbit, the officer blew up in my face! He went pop just as so many others had gone pop at our wedding reception ; his entire anatomy flying in all directions, to turn into a cloud of sooty smoke and mix with the elements. I was frozen with consternation. But not Joy. Instantly she dragged me back into the car. "Don't you get it? Uncle Peter gave him that stick of gum!" "You're damn right!" Bag Ears stated. "The old monkey's gone dear off" his trolley. Maybe he plans to clean out the whole town!" Joy, her eyes slitted, was weaving in and out of traffic so as not to losetrack of the blue roadster. "It's as plain as your nose! He's hand in glove with McCaffery and that blonde is bird-dogging him around town and pointing out McCaffery's enemies. Uncle Peter is knocking them off like clay pigeons." I was amazed at this revelation, but was also thunderstruck by the underworld jargon flowing so easily from Joy's luscious lips. "Angel," I gasped. "Where did you learn to talk like that? Those underworld' terms!" "I read all the true detective magazines I can get my hands on," she said. "They're good fun, but that's beside the point. We've got to nail Uncle Peter and nail him quick, or Aunt Gretchen will ring up a nice big zero in the social world." "How about nailing him without me?" Bag Ears suggested. "It's nine o'clock and Red Nose Tessie never likes to miss none of the show." "I'm sure, Bag Ears," Joy said, "that Tessie would sympathize with our efforts to keep Uncle Peter out of the electric chair." "I doubt it," he replied dubiously. "Tessie's brother got burned in Frisco for knocking over a bank clerk and Tessie never even attended. Let him fry in his own grease was what she said about it." "Nevertheless," Joy said, "I have no time to stop and let you out." A fast, fifteen-block chase followed. Once we lost the blue roadster completely, but by sheer luck, picked it up three blocks further on as it came wheeling out of a side "Okay -- where is he? What did street. We were in a quiet residential section now so there was no one to interfere as Joy skillfully forced the roadster to the curb. I jumped out and leaped swiftly toward the driver's door. T HE blonde sat behind the wheel with a sullen look on her face. "What is this?" she asked. "A stickup?" "Don't be vulgar," I replied. "We are here to take charge of my uncle. This weird slaughter must cease!" Joy was by my side now, but Bag Ears hung back as though somewhat worried about the possible consequences of our act. I heard him muttering: "What if he can just shoot the stuff in your eye maybe? What if a guy doesn't have to swallow it -- ?" Joy's gayety was again coming to the surface. Her eyes were bright and I was struck by the fact that she seemed to thrive on this, sort of thing. "Hello, Blondy," she said. "Get out from behind -- " The blonde's eyes threw sparks. "Who you think you're talking to, you lard -- " "Not Truman," Joy said. "Now get -- " I seized Joy's wrist. "Angel! He's gone! Uncle Peter isn't here!" I stared at Joy in horror. "Do you suppose he inadvertently chewed some of his own gum?" Joy did not reply. She shouldered me aside, opened the car door and surprised me by getting a very scientific grip on Cora. you do with him?" "He's not here!" "Any fool can see that. Did he blow up?" "Of course not. He went to keep a date." The blonde jerked herself loose from Joy's hold and was sullenly straightening her clothing. "I don't see why you and Pretty Boy have to stick your big noses into this. It's none of your business." "We're making it our business." "You don't seem to realize," I said stiffly, "that Unde Peter is very dear to me. He has performed some horrible deeds, and as his loving nephew -- " The blonde seemed puzzled. "You're off your crock! Pete's okay. He just entered into a little private deal to help out Hands McCaffery. I don't see where it's anybody's business, either. If he wanted your help he'd ask for it!" It made my blood run cold to hear this girl refer so casually to the wholesale slaughter that had been going on around us. I strove to find words to shame her, but Joy cut in. And apparently my dear wife was more interested, at the moment, in the details of the affair rather than the morals involved. "McCaffery and Uncle Peter haven't got any deal," she said to the blonde. "You lie as easily as you undress. If they had an arrangement to knock off all those parties at our wedding reception, how come McCaffery brought a machine gun along?" The blonde had an answer. "Hands was a little doubtful. He didn't think Pete could do it -- blow people into thin air just from somealong with the gag but he wasn't going to pass up an opportunity to rub out the Zinsky gang -- or as many as he could hit -- if the gimmick didn't click. That's why he brought the Tommy -- just in case." Joy turned to me. "It fits," she said. "I've been trying to give Uncle Pete the benefit of every doubt but it looks as though you've got a mad dog sniffing at the trunk of your family tree." all wrong. He's not -- " I continued with the questioning. "You are denying that Uncle Peter had anything to do with this deadly serum that disintegrates people before one's eyes?" "I'm not denying it." "Then it follows that your moral sense is so badly corroded you no longer consider murder to be a crime -- " "Now listen here!" "In law," I went on, "the victim's standing in society is not taken into consideration where murder is involved. It is just as wrong in the eyes of the law to murder Cement Mixer Zinsky as the pastor of the First Congregational Church." The blonde looked wonderingly at Joy. "Is this guy for real?" Joy reestablished her hold upon the blonde's anatomy. "Never mind that. All we want from you is answers. Where did Uncle Peter go? Tell me!" "Nuts to you!" Cora replied. "He doesn't want you bothering him." Joy applied pressure. Cora squealed but remained mute. I stepped forward. "Darling," I said grimly. "This sort of thing is not in your line. I realize this woman must be made to talk so I will take over. It will be distasteful to me, but duty is duty." I got a withering look from my dear wife. "Distasteful? In a pig's eye! You'd like nothing better than to get your hands on her -- by way of duty of course." "Joy!" "Don't Joy me" And with an expert twist, she flipped the struggling Cora out of the roadster, goose-stepped her across and into the back seat of the Cadillac. "You and Bag Ears get in and start driving -- slow. I'll have some answers in a minute or two." We did as we were told and I eased the car away from the curb. I had to watch the road, of course, so could not turn to witness what was going on rearward. In the mirror I saw flashes of up-ended legs and, from time to time, other and sundry anatomical parts that flew up in range only to vanish again as the grim struggle went on. Bag Ears, however, turned to witness the bringing forth of the answers. His first comment was, "Oh boy!" Joy was breathing heavily. She said, "Okay, babe. Talk, or I'll put real pressure on this scissors!" Bag Ears said, "Man oh man!" Joy said, "Quit gaping, you moron! I'm back here too." I gave Bag Ears a stern admonition to keep his eyes front. "Give," Toy gritted. "Ouch! No!" "Give!" Cora gave forth an agonized wail. Then an indignant gasp. "Cut it out! You fight dirty! That ain't fair!" "Give!" "All right! All right. Pete's meeting Hands at -- ouch -- Joe's -- ouch -- Tavern on Clark Street. Ouch! Cut it out, will you?" And it was here that I detected a trace of sadism in my lovely wife. "All right," she said regretfully. "Sit up. Gee but you talk easy." "Just where is this tavern?" I asked. "And what is the purpose of the meeting?" Cora's resistance was entirely gone. "In the # block. Pete went there to get some money from Hands to skip town with." Joy now spoke with relish. "Lying again. I'll have to -- " "I ain't lying!" "Don't give us that! Uncle Peter is wealthy. He doesn't need Hands' money. Come here baby." "Wait, Joy," I cut in hastily. "The young lady may be telling the truth. Uncle Peter is always short of funds. You see, Aunt Gretchen holds the purse strings in our family and Uncle Peter is always overdrawn on his allowance." "Then let's get to that tavern and find out what's going on." It took ten minute's to reach the tavern; a standard gin mill with a red neon Sign proclaiming its presence. We quitted the car and I entered first, Joy bringing Cora along with a certain amount of force, and Bag Ears bringing up the rear. And I was just in time to prent another murder. m As I came through the door, I saw Hands and Uncle Peter leaning casually against the bar. There was no one else in the place. The barkeep was facing his two customers and there' were three glasses set before them. The barkeep held one in his hand. Uncle Peter had just finished spiking the barkeep's drink with a clear fluid from a small vial. Uncle Peter said, "It's something new I invented. Pure dynamite. You haven't lived until you've tasted my elixir." it. I want to make sure I wasn't seeing things back at that dame's house." The barkeep said, "Pure dynamite huh ?" "Your not fooling, chum." He raised the glass and grinned. "Salud." I got to the bar just in time to knock the glass out of his hairy paw. He grunted, "What the hell -- oh, a wise guy, huh?" and started over the bar. I yelled, "It's murder. They're trying to poison you!" "Oh, a crackpot!" He came toward me, shaking off Uncle Peter's restraining hand. I took a step backward, thankful he was coming in wide open because I had seen few tougher looking characters In my lifetime. I set myself and sent a short knockout punch against his chin. It was a good punch. Everything was in itIt sounded like a sledge hammer hitting a barn door. The barkeep shook his head and came on in. I stepped back and slugged him again. No result. Then Joy slipped into the narrow space between us. She was smiling and with her upturned waiting lips, she was temptation personified. The barkeep dropped his hands, paralyzed by her intoxicating nearness. She said, "Hello, Iron Head. How about you and I taking a little vacation together somewhere." He grinned and reached for her. This, it developed, was a mistake, because Joy reached for him at the same time. She lifted his two-hundred-odd pounds as though he were a baby and he went flying across the room like a projectile. He hit a radiator head-on and lay still. Again I was stupefied. It seemed I knew nothing at all about this girl I'd married. She smiled at me and said, "Don't be alarmed, angel. There's in explanation. You see my . mother gave me money for piano lessons and I invested most of it in a course of ju-jitsu. I thought an occasion like this might arise sometime. Do you want to take McCaffery, or shall I do it? I doubt if he'll come to the station peaceably." But Hands McCaffery was not to be caught flatfooted. Without his machine gun he was just an ordinary little man who 'didn't want to go with us. He took one look at the prom barkeep, muttered, "Geez!" and headed for the back door. "Get him," Joy yelled. "Maybe we can make a deal with the cops to fry Hands in place of Uncle Peter!" I started after Hands and as I went through the back door I heard Uncle Peter protesting feebly. "I say now. This is all uncalled for -- " "Don't let him get away!" Joy called. "He's got the serum!" That cleared things up somewhat and made me even more resolute. Evidently we had interrupted Uncle Peter and Hands in the process of doing away with all the latter's enemies. With that bottle in his possession, he was a menace to the entire population of the city. A man of his type would certainly have far more enemies than friends. Outside in the dark alley, I was guided only by footsteps. The sound of Hands' retreat told me he was moving up the smelly passageway toward Division Street. I went after him. I am no mean sprinter, having won laurels in college for my fleetness in the two-twenty and the fourforty, and I had no trouble in overtaking the little assassin. We were fast approaching the alley entrance where I would have had the aid of street lights and could have swiftly collared McCaffery whose heavy breathing I could now hear -- when disaster struck in the form of a painful obstacle. It was heavy and it caught me just below the knees. I tripped and fell headlong, plowing along a couple of yards of slippery brick pavement on my face. I got groggily to my feet and shook my head to clear my brain. From the deposits of old eggs, rejected tomatoes and other such refuse in my face and ears, I gathered that I had tripped over a garbage can. This delayed me for some moments. When I finally staggered out into Division Street, a strange sight met my eyes. Hands McCaffery had been apprehended. It seemed that the police had orders to pick him up because two uniformed patrolmen had him backed against the wall and were approaching him with caution. They had him covered and were taking no chances of his pulling a belly gun on them. But he did not draw a gun. Instead, while I stared wide-eyed, he raised Uncle Peter's vial to his lips and drank the contents. I will not bore you with details of his going pop. If you have read this letter carefully, the details are not necessary. I turned and retraced my steps, realizing Hands McCaffery had been vicious and defiant to the last. Rather than submit to arrest, he had taken the wild animal's way out. I arrived back in Joe's Tavern to find the barkccp had been revived and bore none of us any ill-will. This no doubt because of Joy's persuasive abilities. Cora was 'sulking in a booth and Uncle Peter was patching the gash on the barkeep's head. realizing, as a good citizen, I must turn my own uncle over to the police. But there was an interlude before I would be forced into this unpleasant task. This interlude was furnished by Bag Ears. After I acquainted the group with the news of how Hands had taken the easy way out, Bag Ears' face took on a rapt, silent look of happiness. Pie was staring at Joy. He said, "Pretty -- very pretty!" Joy said, "Thank you." Bag Ears said, "Pretty -- pretty -- pretty." Joy looked at me. "What's eating him?" There was a bottle on the bar together with some glasses. I stepped over and poured myself a drink. I certainly needed it. "Bag Ears isn't referring to you, dear. He's alluding to his bells. He's hearing them again." "Oh my sky-blue panties! Pour me a drink." I complied. "You sec Bag Ears is somewhat punch-drunk from his years in the prize ring. I've seen this happen before." We sipped our brandy and watched Bag Ears move toward the door. "That's the way it always is. When he hears the bells he feels a terrific urge to go forth and search for them. But he always ends up at Red Nose Tessie's and she takes him home. It's no use trying to stop him. He'll hang one on you." As Bag Ears disappeared into the street, there were tears in Joy's eyes. "He's dreaming of his bells," she murmured. "I think that's beautiful." She held up her glass. "May he find his bells. Pour me another drink." I poured two and we drank to that. "May we all someday find our bells," joy said with emotion, and I was delighted to find my wife a girl of such deep sentiment. "Pour me another." I did. "Your quotation was wrong, sweetheart," I said. "Don't you mean, 'May we all find our Shangri-La?' " "Of course. Let's drink to it." We drank to it and were rudely interrupted by the barkeep who said, "I hope you got some dough. That stuff ain't water." I gave him a ten dollar bill and -- with a heavy heart -- turned to Uncle Peter. "Come, Uncle," I said gently. "We might as well get it over with." "Get what over with?" "Our trip to the police station. You must give yourself up of course." "What for?" I shook my head sadly. Uncle Peter would never fry. His mind was obviously out of joint. "For murder." He looked at Joy. He said, "Oh, my broken test tube! There is no need of -- " "I know it will be hard for them to convict you without corpus dilecti, but you must confess." "Let's all go over to my laboratory." "If you wish. You may have one last visit there." "Excellent -- one last visit." He smiled and I wondered if I saw a certain craftiness behind it. Cora voiced no objections, seemingly anxious to stay near Uncle Peter. When we got to his laboratory he went on through into his living quarters and took a suit case from the closet. "What are you going to do?" "Pack my things." "Oh, of course. You'll need some things in jail." "Who said anything about jail? I'm going to Tibet." " Tibet f Uncle Peter! I won't allow it. You must stay here and face the music." "The music is in Tibet, Homer. That's one of the reasons I'm going there. To a monastery high in Himalayas. There are some wonderful men there I've always wanted to meet -- yogis who have such control over natural laws that they can walk on water and move straight through solid walls." "But Uncle Peter! If you want to go to Tibet, you should have thought of it before. It's too late now. You've committed murder." "Bosh! I haven't killed anyone. The serum I discovered is one of transition, not murder. It causes the stepping-up of the human physical structure into an infinitely higher rate of vibration. Two controls are distilled into it... One is a timer that sets off the catalysis, and the other is a directive element based upori higher mathematics which allows the creator of the serufn to direct the higher vibratory residue of the physical form to be put down at any prearranged point on the globe before the reforming element takes effect." Joy said, "Oh, my painted Gstring !" I strove to absorb all this. "You mean those people weren't destroyed?" Joy was quicker on the reaction. "Of course. I couldn't picture Uncle Peter as a killer somehow. He merely picked them up here and i set them down in Tibet. Can't you understand? He just explained it to you." Of course I didn't want to admit my mental haziness to Joy, so I skipped hastily over it and pointed an accusing finger at Uncle Peter. "But why couldn't you have conducted your experiments on a higher plane. Why did you have to consort with law-breakers?" J OY had apparently lost interest. She planted a wifely kiss on my cheek and started toward the door. "I'm going back to Joe's Tavern," she said. "It's more fun there. When you get all this straightened out, come on over." I moved to protest but she waved me dow'n. "Never mind. I'll take a cab." She smiled at me sweetly. "And don't stay too long, darling. I'm sure Cora is anxious to get her clothes off." Cora distinctly pronounced an unprintable name but Joy did not hear it. She was already gone. I turned to Uncle Peter. "You did not answer my question." "It's very simple. Even one of your limited brain power should be able to understand it. You see, with finishing my experiments I was not averse to doing the city a favor. Why not, I asked myself, perform them upon persons undesirable to our law-abiding populace? Cora was acquainted with Hands McCaffery and it was through him that I learned who the really undesirable people were." "But why did you invite them to my wedding reception? I'd think you could find a more appropriate place to carry out your -- " "It was an ideal place to get the Zinsky mob together. Like your Aunt Gretchen, Mr. Zinsky has social ambitions, and he anticipated no danger at the reception." "I can see your point." "Also, I wanted to get back at your Aunt Gretchen. She's been very niggardly with funds lately and I wanted to high light my displeasure in a way she would remember." I had a fairly clear picture of things now. But I still felt Uncle Peter should be upbraided on a last point. "Uncle Peter, I think it was shameful of you to inflict those hoodlums on the monks in that monastery in Tibet. They'll be in panic." "No. I was careful to send along two policemen to keep them in hand." "So you're leaving for Tibet?" "Of course. I've got to follow up and check on the success of my serum, though there is really no doubt as to its potency. Also I'll be able to achieve a life-long ambition -- that of meeting the yogis from whom I should learn a great deal." I glanced at Cora. "Are you taking her with you?" "Of course." "But yogis are above things of the flesh." Uncle Peter looked me straight in the eye. "Maybe the yogis are, but I'm not." There seemed nothing else to discuss, so I left Uncle Peter's chambers and went back to Joe's Bar. My mind, now at ease, was filled again with thought of the honeymoon to come. I would pick up Joy and we would be off to pinktinted lands. But there was, a slight hitch. When I arrived at Joe's Bar, Joy was gone. I inquired of the barkeep and he brought me up to date. "That screwy dame that can throw a guy around? Sure, she was here. She had a few drinks and then left again. She said something about having to help a friend find some bells he lost. I don't know what kind of bells they was but that dame can locate them if anybody can." As I was about to leave the tav ern, it occurred to me you would want to know the truth of what's been going on, so I'm now in the backroom writing this report which I will drop into the nearest mailbox. Then I will go out and find my bride and start upon a wellearned honeymoon. If you have any questions, they'll have to wait until I get back.  Yours truly, Homer Nicholas. Quoting Our Contemporaries Lila Shaffer "The opportunity for glory still remains... for the first human to go into space. So far, no altitude flights beyond the atmosphere have been made. All high altitude work with Neptunes and V-#s still remains a matter of remote control, although in the near future, attempts will undoubtedly be made to send humans to altitudes greater than... one hundred miles. There is opportunity for immortality for somebody." Les and Es Cole "Aside from the fact that some of the most 'adult' literature we've read has been 'escdpist', we seriously question... (the) statement that... (science fiction) is trending toward maturity and away from adventure stories... We feel that the only science fiction magazines these we find most magazines opersationalism, and Shallow Plotting." They came io Mars inquiring after the stuff of Empire. They got -- The By Arthur G. Hill of the rest because Larkin had bought an unfair advantage -- a copy of the Primary Report. There were seven of them, all varying in appearance, but with one thing in common; in the eyes of each glowed the greed for Empire. They came down in a flash of orange tailfire and they looked first at the Martians. "Green," marveled Evans. "What a queer shade of green!" "Not important," Cleve, the psychologist replied. "Merely a matter of pigmentation. White, yellow, black, green. It proves only that God loves variety." "And lord how they grin!" Cleve peered learnedly. "Doesn't indicate a thing. They were born with those grins. They'll die with them." Of the seven strong men, Larkin exuded the most power. Thus, his role of leader was a natural one. No man would ever stand in front of Larkin. He said, "To hell with color or the shape of their mouths. What we're after lies inside. Come on. Let's set up a camp." "For the time being," Cleve cautioned, "we must ignore them. Later -- we know what to do. I'll give the nod." They brought what they needed out of the ship. They brought the plastic tents, broke the small, attached cylinders, and watched the tents bulge up into living quarters. They set up the vapor condenser from the air about them. They plugged a line into the ship and attached it to the tent-line. Immediately the gasses in the plastic tents began to glow and give off both light and heat. They did many things while the Martians stood silently by with their arms hanging, their splay-feet flat on the ground, their slashmouths grinning. The seven sat down to their first meal under the Martian stars and while they ate the rich, delicate foods, they listened to the words of Larkin. "A new empire waiting to be built. A whole planet -- virgin -- new." "Not new," Dane, the archeologist said. "It's older than Earth. It's been worked before." Larkin waved an impatient hand. "But hardly scratched. It can have risen and fallen a thousand times for all we care. The important thing is the vital ingredient of empire. Is it here? Can it be harnessed? Are we or are we not, on the threshold of wealth, splendor, and progress so great as to take away the breath?" And as Larkin spoke, all seven men looked at the Martians ; looked covertly while appearing to study the rolling plain and the purple ridges far away; the texture of the soil ; the color of the sky ; the food on their plates; the steaming fragrance of their coffee. They looked at all these things but they studied the Martians. "Stupid looking animals," Evans muttered. "Odd though. So like us -- yet so different." At first there had been only a handful of Martians to grin at the landing of the ship. Now they numbered over a hundred, their ranks augmented by stragglers who came to stare with their fellows in happy, silence. "The prospects are excellent," Cleve said. Then he jerked his attention back to Larkin from whom., it had momentarily wandered. When Larkin spoke, one listened. words toward a young man named Smith. Smith had inherited a great deal of money which was fine. But Larkin wasn't too sure of his qualifications otherwise. " -- the pyramids," Larkin was saying. "Would they have ever been built if the men up above -- the men with vision -- had had to worry about a payroll?" Smith regarded the Martians with not quite the impersonal stare of the other six Earthlings. Once or twice he grinned back at them. "I'll grant the truth of what you say," he told Larkin, "but what good were the pyramids? They're something I could never figure." Smith had a sardonic twist of  mouth that annoyed Larkin. "Let's not quibble, man. I merely used the pyramids as an example. Call them Empire; call them any Empire on Earth from the beginning of known history and let's face facts." "Facts?" Smith asked. He had been looking at a six-foot-six Martian, thinking what a magnificent specimen he was. If only they'd wipe off those silly grins. "Yes, facts. The building must be done. It is a law of nature. Man must progress or not. And what empire can arise without free labor? Can we develop this planet at union scale? Impossible! Yet it's crying to be developed." Cleve knocked the ashes off his cigar and frowned. Being a man of direct action, he inquired. "Do you want your money back, Smith?" The latter shook his head. "Oh no! Don't get me wrong, gentlemen. I'm for empire, first last and always. And if we can lay the foundations of one on the backs of these stupid creatures, I'm for it." "I still don't like your -- " "My outspoken manner? Don't give it a thought, old man. I just don't want to be all cloyed up with platitudes. If we're going to chain the children of Israel into the house of bondage, let's get on with it." "I don't like your attitude," Larkin said stubbornly. "In the long run, it will benefit these people." "Let's say, rather, that it may benefit their children. I doubt if these jokers will be around very long after we start cracking the whip." Dane was stirred. "The whip," he murmured. "Symbol of empire." But nobody heard him. They were too busy listening to Larkin and Smith -- and watching the Martians. The Martians stood around grinning, waiting patiently for something to happen. Larkin's attitude toward them had changed again. First there had been curiosity. Then a narrow-eyed calculation; now he regarded them with contempt. The careful, studied checks and tests would be made of course. But Larkin, a man of sure instincts, had already made up his mind. He stretched luxuriously. "Let's call it a day and turn in. Tomorrow we'll go about the business at hand with clearer heads." "A good idea," Cleve said, "but first, one little gesture. I think it would be judicious." He eyed the Martians, settling finally upon onera male -- standing close and somewhat apart from the rest. Cleve scowled. Standing erect, he called, "Hey -- you!" He interpreted the words with a beckoning gesture of his arm. "Come here! Here boy! Over here!" The Martian reacted with a typically Earthian gesture. He pointed to his own chest with one green finger, while a questioning expression reflected through the eternal grin. "Yes, you! On the double." T HE Martian came forward. There was in his manner a slight hesitation, and Smith expected to sec his hind quarters wriggle like that of a dog -- uncertain, but eager to please. Cleve pointed with a martinet gesture toward the smoked-out cigar butt he'd thrown to the ground. "Pick it up!" The Martian stood motionless. "Pick -- it -- up, you stupid lout!" Larkin -- now beyond sanity -- was gibbering in the grave. The Martians understood. With a glad little whimper, he bent over and took the cigar butt in his hand. "There," Cleve said. "Garbage can! Get it? Garbage can. Place for trash -- for cigar butts. Put it in there." Smith wasn't sure whether the grin deepened or not. He thought it did, as the Martian laid the cigar butt carefully into the trash can, "Okay, you fella," Cleve barked, still scowling. "Back and away now. Stay out there! Get it? Only come when you're called." It took a few eloquent gestures, including the pantomime of swinging a whip, before the Martian understood and complied. After he backed into the circle of his fellows, Cleve dropped the cruel overseer manner and turned with satisfaction to Larkin. "I think there will be no trouble at all," he said. "Tomorrow we'll really get down to cases. I predict smooth sailing." They said goodnight to each other and went about the business of preparing for slumber. As' he raised the glowing flap of his tent, Larkin saw Smith lounging in a chair before the electric heat unit. "Aren't you going to get some sleep?" "In a little while. I'm going to wait around until those two famous moons come. Want to .see them first hand." "Awaste of time," Larkin said. "Better keep your mind on more important things." "Goodnight," Smith said. Larkin did not reply, and Smith turned his head to look at the Martians. He wondered where they had come from. They probably had a village somewhere over the rise. He regarded them without fear or apprehension of what might occur during the sleeping hours. Tie had read the Primary Report, brought back by the pioneer expedition. These people were entirely harmless. Also they were possessed of remarkable stamina. They had stood for days, watching the first expedition, grinning at it, without nourishment of any kind. Maybe they live off the atmosphere, Smith told himself dreamily. At any rate, they were ideal specimens to use as the foundation stones of an empire. He lay back, thinking of Larkin ; he did not like Larkin personally, but he had to admire the steel in the man; the unswerving determination that had made him what he was. His mind drifted back to the things of beauty around him. The far purple ridges had changed now, as a light bloomed behind them to gleam like azure through old crystal. Then the two moons shot over the horizon; huge silver bullets riding the thin atmosphere. The oldest planet. Had it ever been great? Were the bones of any dead civilizations mouldering beneath this strange yellow soil? Smith closed his eyes while the cool Martian breezes soothed his face. Greatness. What was greatness after all? Merely a matter of viewpoint perhaps. Smith got up and moved slowly toward his tent. Out in the shadows he could feel the grins of the Martians. "Goodnight," he called. But there was no answer. said. "It seemed as good a place as any." "Fine," Larkin rumbled. He wore boots and britches and a big, widebrimmed hat. He had on soft leather gloves. He looked like an empire builder. The Martians were standing around grinning at the pile of shovels lying in the fuzz-bush. The Martians seemed interested and appeared to communicate with one another in some imperceptible manner. Larkin shoved through the circle of green men, pushing rudely. He stopped, picked up one of the shovels; thrust it toward a Martian. The Martian took it in his hands. "It's very important that you tell them -- that you don't show them," Cleve said. "You must not do any of the work yourself." "I'll handle it," Larkin snapped. "Now you -- all of you! Grab a shovel. Pick 'em up, see? Pick 'em up! We've got work to do. A ditch to dig." Larkin's pantomime was a universal language. "We start the ditch here. Right here -- you fella! Get digging! And put your back into that shovel. Hit jaard or maybe it gives the whip -- understand?" Larkin made a threatening motion toward the lash coiled, at his belt. Smith, already on the scene, turned as Evans and Dane arrived carrying undefined plastic. They snapped the cylinders and chairs appeared; chairs -- and a table upon which Garter and Lewis, bringing up the rear, placed a pitcher of beer, glasses and a box of cigars. Cleve, the psychologist, looked with satisfaction upon the string of Martians manipulating the shovels. "All right," he said. "Let's sit down. Pour the beer, one of you." "Allow me," Smith said. He fought to straighten the smile bending his lips. He picked up the pitcher and poured beer into the glasses. It all seemed so absurd; these grim-faced men acting out an asinine tableau. Cleve caught the smile, "I wish you'd take this seriously," he said'. "It's a mighty touchy and important business." "Sorry," Smith said, raising his glass. "Here's to empire." Larkin was striding up and down the line of straining Martians. The scowl had become a part of him. It's getting him, Smith marveled. Act or no act, he likes it. Experiment or not, he's in his element. The six men sat drinking their beer and watching Larkin. But only Cleve was aware of the skill with which the man worked. The gradual ! application of pressure; the careful moving forward from bog to bog with the path of retreat always open. From sharpness to brusqueness. From the brusque to the harsh. From the harsh to the brutal. "Will you tell me," Smith asked, "why we have to sit here drinking like a pack of fools? I don't like beer." "I'm not enjoying it, either," Cleve said. "But you can certainly understand that the roles must be set right from the beginning. They must understand we are their masters, so we must conduct ourselves in that manner. Never any sign that could be interpreted as compromise." Larkin, satisfied with the progress of the entirely useless ditch, came to the table and raised a glass of beer. He wiped the foam from his mustache and asked, "What do you think?" directing the question toward Cleve. T HE latter regarded the sweating Martians with calculating eyes. "It's going entirely as I predicted. The next step is in order, I believe." "You think it's safe?" "I'm certain of it." Smith, studying Larkin, saw the latter smile, and was again struck by its quality. Whatever the test, Larkin's for it, even above the call of scientific experimentation. Larkin was uncoiling the whip from his belt. He strode toward the fast-deepening ditch. He selected a subject. "You -- fella. You're lazy, huh? You like to gold-brick it? Then see how you like this!" He laid the whip across the green shoulders of the Martian. The Martian winced. He raised an arm to shield off the whip. Again it curled against his flesh. He whimpered. His grin was stark, inquiring. "Hit that shovel, you green bastard!" Larkin roared. The Martian understood. So did the other Martians. Their muscles quivered as they drove into their work. Larkin came back, smiling -- almost dreamily, Smith thought. Cleve said, "Excellent. I'd hardly hoped for such conformity. Hardly expected it." "You mean," Smith asked, "that this little scene can be projected from a dozen to a hundred? From a hundred to a thousand -- ?" "From this little plot to the whole surface of the planet," Cleve said. "The mass is nothing more than a collection of individuals. Control the individual and you've got the mob. That is if you follow through with the original method. Set the hard pattern." "Then we're in -- is that it? They've passed every test with flying colors." "I'm sure they will," Cleve said, frowning. "But we must be thorough." "There's still another test?" "Yes. The test of final and complete subservience. It must be proven beyond all doubt that they know their masters." "You don't think they're aware yet that we are their masters?" "I'm sure they know. It only remains to be proven." Cleve glanded up at Larkin. "Maybe this is as far as we should go today. We've made marvelous progress." That characteristic wave of Larkin's hand; the gesture of the empire builder brushing away mountains. "Why wait? I want to get this thing over with. You said yourself they're under our thumb." Cleve pondered, staring at the Martians. "Very well. There's really no reason to wait." Larkin smiled and turned toward the diggers, only half visible now from the depths of the ditch. He walked forward, appearing to exercise more care, this time, in the selection of his subject. Finally, he pointed at one of the Martians. "You -- fella! Come here!" Several of them looked at one another a trifle confused. "You -- damn it! What are you waiting for?" One of them climbed slowly from the trench. While he was engaged in so doing, Smith noticed two things. He saw the look of rage, simulated or otherwise, that came into Larkin's face. And he saw Cleve's fingers tighten on the edge of the table. Larkin had a gun in his fist; a roar in his voice. "When I talk -- you jump! Get that? All of you!" He fired three bullets into the Martian's brain. The latter slumped grinning to the ground. Larkin, his breath coming jerkily, stood poised on the balls of his feet. The men at the table sat frozen -- waiting. Around them -- on the plain -- some two hundred Martians stood motionless. 'The final test, Smith thought. To prove they're cattle. echo of the gun faded out. Silence. And nothing. The Earthmen picked up their breathing where they'd dropped it. Larkin's breath exploded in savage voice -- triumphant voice. The Martians were his. "Come on, some of you! Dig a hole and bury that carrion! And if anybody still wonders who's boss around here -- let him step forward!" "They took it!" Gleve whispered. "Glory be -- they took it!" Four Martians climbed grinning from the trench. They faced Larkin and stood as though awaiting instructions. "Dig there," Larkin said. They went stolidly to work and Larkin pocketed his gun, making the pocketing a gesture of contempt. "You see," Cleve said, with the tone of one explaining an abstract problem, "we were at somewhat of a disadvantage because they are incapable of indicating emotion by facial expression. Thus the last test was necessary. If we could have judged the degree of fear previously instilled, that last might not have been necessary." "Just as well to have a double check nontheless," Dane said. "Look at them! You'd think nothing out of the ordinary had happened." Larkin strode back to the table. "Glad we got it over with," he said. "Now we know. Gleve can head back for Earth tomorrow. Initial supplies will come to about twenty can stay here and really drive these beggars. Get the foundations dug; get the rock down from the hills." "A planet in glorious resurrection," said Dane, the poet of the group. "They've got the grave dug," Cleve observed. "They're waiting for orders." "Such cattle," Evans muttered. Larkin strode back to the grave. He pointed. "Him -- body into the grave. Snap into it. We've got work to do." The Martians put the body into the grave. Then a tall, green man appeared behind Larkin. He put his arms around Larkin's body. Another Martian took the gun from Larkin's pocket. And they pushed the screaming Earthman down into the grave. Smith sprang to his feet. "For God's sake!" "Sit down, you fool!" Cleve hissed. "Do you want to die? We've miscalculated. Something's wrong." The big Martian was standing on Larkin. The others threw in the soil. Larkin, now beyond sanity, was gibbering like an animal. Smith sat down. The Earthman presented a frozen tableau. Soon the gibbering could no longer be heard and the big Martian stepped out of the grave. "Leave everything," Cleve whispered. "Get up very casually and walk back to the ship. Get inside it." "May God help us," Dane quavered. "Shut up! Act natural." They went back and got into the ship while the Martians stood patiently about waiting for something to happen. Their patience was rewarded when the ship arose on a great flaming tail from the surface of the planet. It was a sight worth waiting for. They Called Her "Crazy Bet # Richard Wilmcr Rowan has made a professional study of secret service, espionage and spy systems the world over. At night cloak-anddagger ghosts prowl the streets around his Jersey City home! And why not? A glimpse into his tremendous files would reveal murder, chicanery, intrigue, theft, arson, rape, treachery, mayhem, sabotage, et cetera, et cetera ; skeletons in the closets of nations and empires, why wars have been won and lost, why nations have risen and fallen! One case is that of Miss Elizabeth Van Lew, belle of the old southern aristocracy, who did more to defeat her native South than an army of Yankee troops. For more than four years her fantastic spy ring operated right in the middle of Richmond, Virginia, capital of the Confederacy! Not even Jefferson Davis himself escaped her probing tentacles. The amazing story of her exploits -- They Called Her "Crazy Bet " -- is in the July issue of Miss Van Lew among the first ten spy masters in the annals of modern espionage. Here is the fascinating at your neighborhood newsstand -- only # cents. Personalities His objectives fade in the West O N A certain January evening in #, a group of prominent gentlemen gathered in the New York flat of one Charles Hoy Fort, a resident of the Bronx. Present were Theodore Dreiser, Burton Rascoe, Harry Elmer Barnes, John Cowper Powys, Booth Tarkington, Harry Leon Wilson, Ben Hecht, Alexander Woollcott, Clarence Darrow, J. David Sterne, Aaron Sussman, and several others, including H. Allen Smith who later wrote an amusing, though somewhat inaccurate, account of the proceedings. The purpose of the meeting was the establishment of a Fortean Society, to carry on the work of Charles Fort and to spread his ideas. Fort surely needs no introduction to devotees of science fiction and fantasy. Indeed, he may well be termed the spiritual father of both these literary fields. It was recently proposed to form a club that would be called, "Writers Who Have Stolen Plots From Charles Fort." The idea was dropped, however, when it was realized that such a group would include virtually every modern writer in the imaginative field, including many now deceased. At least a dozen novels and hundreds of short stories have been based directly or indirectly on ideas set forth in Fort's four books -- Lo, The Book of the Damned, Wild Talents, and New Lands. Nor is this surprising, because Fort's books are a compilation -- documented, indexed, classified -- of strange, eerie, and inexplicable occurrences on this supposedly mundane earth of ours -- happenings far more strange than the most imaginative fictioneer ever dreamed up. Through the pages of Fort's books stalk unknown animals, alien races, visitants from other planets, survivals of strange cults, showers of amazing objects arid living entities, teleportations, and people possessed of powers bordering on the supernatural. There are accounts of men who could not be caught; men who could not be seen; men who could not be hung. The maddest menagerie and freakshow ever assembled under one canvas. Fort's sources were always fairly reputable; newspapers, police blotters, and even scientific publications and text books. Yet they were widely ignored by a world unable to fit them into definite category ; a world which preferred to relegate them to oblivion as damned by orthodox science, yet well attested. The works of Charles Fort are startling to the eye; nightmarish to the mind. Of course, they may not all be true, those amazing pccople, things, and occurrences which were the delight of Fort's life. Indeed, there is strong evidence that Fort himself did not actually believe all of them, or the theories he drew from them. Many are unquestionably hoaxes, arising from the most gargantuan sense of humor in modern letters. most exact double for the screen comediant, Chester Conklin. And he was also, pure Mack Sennett in mentality. His books were written with a slapstick more so than with a pen, and are one long guffaw from start to finish, interlarded with conceits and wisecracks to a degree which sometimes offends the serious reader. Still, Fort himself invented nothing. He simply set down what had previously been recorded by thousands of observers all over the world. This would seem to mitigate against hoaxing in any marked degree by Fort himself. Certainly there is nothing obviously faked in his books. No complete check of Fort's works has ever been made of course. It would take a lifetime. But spot checks have been made, and all details, as set down by Fort, have been found to be correct. The phenomena were observed -- or at least vast numbers of disinterested persons believed they observed them. Moreover, evidence continues to pour in that the phenomena have continued since Fort's death. The number of Fortean occurrences in recent years has been startling. Certainly his books would have been hugely expanded had he lived on. In one department alone -- the flying saucers -- more phenomena have accumulated in the last four years than in the preceding century. At the time Fort wrote The Book of the Damned, no one but he himself believed in flying saucers. Now it is safe to say that a vast minority -- possibly even a majority -- of people do believe in them, though they may have varied theories of explanation. So, at the very least, Fort's theories deserve investigation. And it is highly unlikely that they will get it from the orthodox scientists. Science has become a bit more broadminded since Fort's day, what with Einstein and the atomic bomb. Still, the scientific attitude remains pretty much that of a prominent physicist who made assertion that while a certain dogmatism may have existed once, it has vanished forever; that today, savants are wholly openminded, and ready to investigate anything without preconceptions. "Do you mean," he was asked, "that if a werewolf were brought into your laboratory, you would investigate it without prejudice?" The physicist shrugged. "Oh well," he murmured, "of course there are no werewolves." Hence, an organization wholly dedicated to the collection and investigation of Fortean phenomena is not only desirable, but necessary if anything is ever to be learned at all. It is clear, however, that the present Fortean Society is not that organization and shows no sign of so becoming. It would appear that the group is in the hands of the wrong people -- or rather, the wrong person. Even that group of original founders, though admittedly eminent, were not fantasy or science fiction writers; nor were they even students of the subjects. Of the lot, only W'oollcott and Hecht dabbled in the field of fantasy. have joined the society since the enrollment of the original roster. A. Merritt belonged until his death, and Ivan T, Sanderson, the "weird naturalist" who discovered evidences of many strange creatures, is a present member. But such men are few in the Fortean ranks and have nothing whatever to do with running the society. Indeed, they do not even seem to be welcomed. The whole organization has gravitated into the hands of one man, the original secretary, Tiffany Thayer. Six of the founders, beginning with Dreiser, e'dited one issue each of the society's publication -- Doubt -- then gradually dropped out. Thayer has edited all subsequent issues of the organ, collects the money, and handles all the correspondence. To all practical purposes, he is the society. Nor, so far as can be learned, has Thayer much in the way of qualifications for that role apart from having taken it over. He was a professional writer, but not in the least along Fortean lines. Now, he apparently uses the society as a vehicle for his own ideas and promotions with no check whatsoever upon his authority. The members of the San Francisco branch discovered this last, much to their sorrow, a couple of years ago. The chapter, made up largely of writers, artists, students of bizarre subjects, and all Fortean devotees, was not only the second largest in the country, but the first to hold regular meetings and investigate phenomena as a group. Meeting, in the Writer's Workship of Kenneth MacNickoll, on Lom-, bard Street, its gatherings often numbered fifty or more. It gathered and forwarded large amounts of data, none of which ever appeared in the Fortean magazine... Thayer was critical of the chapter from the beginning, since it insisted on following straight Fortean lines. "Most of the members," he complained in a letter, "are not so much concerned with two-headed calves as with other rebellions." Finding the chapter adamant, Thayer resorted to stronger measures. He simply excommunicated the entire unit, forbidding it to use the society's name in research, or to hold further meetings. Seeking to appeal his decision, the chapter found that there was no one to appeal to. The original founders are all either dead or quiescent, and Thayer rules alone. Virtually all the local membership resigned in a body, and will in the future have nothing to do with the society, although it retains enthusiasm for Fort and his ideas. Thayer, (riding high in the saddle, publishes the society organ -- Doubt -- and is cotnplete master of its policy and content. Apart from advertising Fort's works, it blurbs, chiefly, two totally un-Fortean tomes, entitled, America Needs Indians, and Raped Again! The latter is described as "a blueprint for enslaving whole populations." So far as is known. Fort wasn't interested in enslaving populations. In an appended list of some twenty publications offered for sale by the society, only one -- a tiny pamphlet on an alleged sea-serpent off the New England coast -- remotely resembles Fort. T HE editorial tone of the magazine is a far cry from the lusty and lamented Fortean days. Filled with sophomoric humor, continual reference to newspapers is made by using the term "wypers". Irony is laid on with a trowel. Good taste goes by the boards. The pretense is consistently maintained that the formation date of the society was the year One, and all items are double-dated in order to add to the confusion. Thayer seems to write most of the material himself, although an occasional article creeps in by other authors -- mainly mathematical and usually unintelligible. Extracts from the notes of Fort are published in a special section in the rear of each issue. Thus has the old master been relegated to the morgue. And the worse, because the notes are usually meaningless, the references done in a cryptic sort of shorthand, and no attempt made to translate or develop them. An occasional note on phenomena occurs now and then, but is usually slanted to make political preachment. A sad irony, since Fort eschewed politics wholly and never wrote a line in that direction. Thayer, during World War II, sniped at the allied side in every issue, violently attacking Civil Defense among other things. Later he hailed the escape of Gerhardt Eisler as the "most Fortean event" of its period. Garey Davis, the curiously deluded young man who renounced American citizenship and became a "world citizen," was made an Honorary Fellow of the Society for his action. Davis has since recanted his action and has applied for reinstatement. When the atom bomb first appeared, Thayer denounced it as a hoax -- a deception of the American government. For months he denounced also, those silly enough to be taken in. He quieted down, finally, under a deluge of protest, but he has never officially retracted the absurd view. He reacted likewise in the matter of the flying saucers. Here, truly, was the unkindest cut, as Fort himself wrote of them twenty years before Kenneth Arnold told of seeing the covey. Thayer claimed the saucers were another fraud of the government, this time to stimulate re( Continued on page #I ) By August Derleth Mcllvaine sat down to his machine , turned the complex knobs , and a message flamed across the void Old Thaddeus Mcllvaine discovered a dark star and took it for his own. Thus he inherited a dark destiny -- or did he? said Tex Harrigan. "Lost mer; and he had the fixed idea people or strayed, crackpots or that there was life somewhere outwarped geniuses -- I know enough side this planet and that it was of them to fill an entire department possible to communicate with other of queer people. I've been a rebeings -- but unlike most others, he porter long enough to have run into tried it constantly with the queer quite a few of them." machinery he had rigged up. "For example?" I said, recogniz"Well, now, this old fellow had ing Harrigan's mellowness. a trio of cronies with whom he "Take Thaddeus Mcllvaine," played on occasion down at Bixby's. said Harrigan. He had no one else to confide in. "I never heard of him." He kept them up with his progress "I suppose not," said Harrigan. among the stars and his communi"But I knew him. He was an eccation with other life in the cosmos centric old fellow who had a modest beyond our oral, and they made a income -- enough to keep up his great joke out of it, from all I hobbies, which' were three: he could gather. I suppose, because he played cards and chess at a tavern had no one else to talk to, Mccalled Bixby's on North Clark Ilvaine took it without complaint. Well, as I said, I never heard of him until one morning the city editor -- it was old Bill Henderson then -- called me in and said, 'Harrigan, we just got a lead on a fellow named Thaddeus Mcllvaine who claims to have discovered a new star. Amateur astronomer up North Clark. Find him and get a story.' So I set out to track him down..." It was a great moment for Thaddeus Mcllvaine. He sat down among his friends almost portentously, adjusted his spectacles, and peered over theifi in his usual manner, half way between a querulous oldster and a reproachful schoolmaster. "I've done it," he said quietly. "Aye, and what?" asked Alexander testily. "I discovered a new star." "Oh," said Leopold flatly. "A cinder in your eye." "It lies just off Arcturus," Mcllvaine went on, "and it would appear to be coming closer." "Give it my love," said Richardson with a wry smile. "Have you named it yet? Or don't the discoverers of new stars name them any more? Mcllvaine's Star -- that's a good name for it. Hard a port of Arcturus, with special, displays on windy nights." Mcllvaine only smiled. "It's a dark star," he said presently. "It doesn't have light." He spoke almost apologetically, as if somehow he had disappointed his friends. "I'm going to try and communicate with it."  "That's the ticket," said Alexander. "Cut for deal," said Leopold. That was how the news about Mcllvaine's Star was received by his cronies. Afterward, after Mcllvaine had dutifully played several games of euchre, Richardson conceived the idea of telephoning the Globe to announce Mcllvaine's discovery. self seriously," Harrigan went on. "And yet he was so damned mousy about it. I mean, you got the impression that he had been trying for so long that now he hardly believed in his star himself any longer. But there it was. He had a long, detailed story of its discovery, which was an accident, as those things usually are. They happen all the time, and his story sounded convincing enough. Just the same, you didn't feel that he really had anything. I took down notes, of course; that was routine. I got a picture of the old man, with never an idea we'd be using it. "To tell the truth, I carried my notes around with me for a day or so before it occurred to me that it wouldn't do any harm to put a call in to Yerkes Observatory up in Wisconsin. So I did, and they confirmed Mcllvaine's Star. The Globe had the story, did it up in fine style. "It was two weeks before we heard from Mcllvaine again... That night Mcllvaine was more than usually diffident. He was not like a man bearing a message of considerable importance to himself. He slipped into Bixby's, got a glass of beer, and approached the table where his friends sat, almost with trepidation. "It's a nice evening for May," he said quietly. Richardson grunted. Leopold said, "By the way, Mac, whatever became of that star of ay ours? The one the papers wrote up." "I think," said Mcllvaine cautiously, "I'm quite sure -- I have got in touch with them. Only," his brow wrinkled and furrowed, "I can't understand their language." "Ah," said Richardson with an edge to his voice, "the thing for, you to do is to tell them that's your star, and they'll have to speak English from now on, so you can understand them. Why, next thing we know, you'll be getting yourself a rocket or a space-ship and going over to that star to set yourself up as king or something." "King Thaddeus the First," said Alexander loftily. "All you stardwellers may kiss the royal foot." "That would be unsanitary, I think," said Mcllvaine, frowning. Poor Mcllvaine! They made him the butt of their jests for over an hour before he took himself off to his quarters, where he sat himself down before his telescope and found his star once more, almost huge enough to blot out Arcturus, but not quite, since it was moving away from that amber star now. Mcllvaine's star was certainly much closer to the earth than it had been. He tried once again to contact it with his home-made radio, and once again he received a succession of strange, rhythmic noises which he could not doubt were speech of some kind or other -- a rasping, grating speech, to be sure, utterly unlike the speech of Mcllvaine's own kind. It rose and fell, became impatient, urgent, despairing -- Mcllvaine sensed all this and strove mightily to understand. He sat there for perhaps two hours when he received the distant impression that someone was talking to him in his own language. But there was no longer any sound on the radio. He could not understand what had taken place, but in a few moments he received the clear conviction that the inhabitants of his star had managed to discover the basic elements of his language by the simple process of reading his mind, and were now prepared to talk with him. What manner of creatures inhabited Earth? they wished to know. Mcllvaine told them. He visualized one of his own kind and tried to put him into words. It was difficult, since he could riot rid himself of the conviction that his interlocutors might be utterly alien. They had no conception of man and doubted man's existence on any other star. There were plantpeople on Venus, ant-people on Andromeda, six-legged and fourarmed beings which were equal parts mineral and vegetable on Betelguese -- 'but nothing resembling man. "You are evidently alone of your kind in the cosmos," said his interstellar correspondent. "And what about you?" cried Mcllvaine with unaccustomed heat. Silence was his only answer, but presently he conceived a mental image which was remarkable for its vividness. But the image was of nothing he had ever seen before -- of thousands upon thousands of miniature beings, utterly alien tb man; they resembled amphibious insects, with thin, elongated heads, large eyes, and antennae set upon a scaled, four-legged body, with rudimentary beetle-like wings. Curiously, they seemed ageless; he could detect no difference among them I -- all appeared to be the same age. "We are not, but we rejuvenate regularly," said the creature with whom he corresponded in this strange manner. Did they have names? Mcllvaine wondered. "I am Guru," said the star's inhabitant. "You are Mcllvaine." And the civilization of their star? Instantly he saw in bis mind's eye vast cities, which rose from beneath a surface which appeared to bear no vegetation recognizable to any human eye, in a terrain which seemed to be desert, of monolithic buildings, which were windowless and had openings only of sufficient size to permit the free passage of its dwarfed dwellers. Within the buildings was evidence of a great and old civilization... lieved all this. What an imagination the man had! Of course, the boys at Bixby's gave him a bad time ; I dorf t know how he stood it, but he did. And he always came back. Richardson called the story in; he took a special delight in deviling Mcllvaine, and I was sent out to see the old fellow again. "You couldn't doubt his sincerity. And yet he didn't sound touched. "But, of course, that part about the insect-like dwellers of the star comes straight out of Wells, doesn't it?" I put in. ' "Wells and scores of others," agreed Harrigan. "Wells was probably the first writer to suggest insectivorous inhabitants on Mars; his were considerably larger, though." "Go on." "Well, I talked with Mcllvaine for quite a while. He told me all about their civilization and about his friend, Guru. You might have thought he was talking about a neighbor of his I had only to step, outside to meet. "Later on, I dropped around at Bixby's and had a talk with the boys there. Richardson let me in on a secret. He had decided to rig up a connection to Mcllvaine's machine and do a little talking to the old fellow, making him believe Guru was coming through in English. He meant to give Mcllvaine a harder time than ever, and once he had him believing everything he planned to say, they would wait for him at Bixby's and let him make a fool of himself. "It didn't work out quite that way, however... "Mcllvaine, can you hear me?" Mcllvaine started with astonishment. His mental impression of Guru became confused; the voice speaking English came clear as a bell, as if from no distance at all. "Yes," he said hesitantly. "Well, then, listen to me, listen to Guru. We have now had enough information from you to suit our ends. Within twenty-four hours, we, the inhabitants of Ahli, will begin a war of extermination against Earth... '..." "But, why?" cried Mcllvaine, astounded. The image before his mind's eye cleared. The cold, precise features of duru betrayed anger. "There is interference," the thought-image informed him. "Leave the machine for a few moments, while we use the disintegrators." Before he left the machine, Mcllvaine had the impression of a greater machine being attached to the means of communication which the inhabitants of his star were using to communicate with him. "Mcllvaine's story was that a few moments later there was a blinding flash just outside his window," continued Harrigan. "There was also a run of instantaneous fire from the window to his machine. When he had collected his wits sufficiently, he ran outside to look. There was nothing there but a kind of grayish dust in a little mound -- as if, as he put it, 'somebody had cleaned out a vacuum bag'. He went back in and examined the space from the window to the machine ; there were two thin lines of dust there, hardly perceptible, just as if something had  been attached to the machine and led outside. "Now the obvious supposition is naturally that it was Richardson out there, and that the lines of dust from the window to the machine represented the wires Jie had attached to his microphone while Mcllvaine was at Bixby's entertaining his other two cronies, but this is fact, not fiction, and the point of the episode is that Richardson disappeared from that night on." "You investigated, of course?" I asked. Harrigan nodded. "Quite a lot of us investigated. The police might have done better. There was a gang war on in Chicago just at that time, and Richardson was nobody with any connections. His nearest relatives weren't anxious about anything but what they might inherit; to tell the truth, his cronies at Bixby's were the only people who worried about him. Mcllvaine as much as the rest of them. "Oh, they gave the old man a hard time, all right. They went through his house with a finetoothed comb. They dug up his yard, his cellar, and generally put him through it, figuring he was a natural to hang a murder rap on. But there was just nothing to be found, and they couldn't manufacture evidence when there was nothing to show that Mcllvaine ever knew that Richardson planned to have a little fun with him. "And no one had seen Richardson there. There was nothing but Mcllvaine's word that he had heard what he said he heard. He needn't have volunteered that, but he did. After the police had finished with him, they wrote him off as a harmless nut. But the question of what happened to Richardson wasn't solved from that day to this." "People have been known to walk out of their lives," I said. "And never come back." "Oh, sometimes they do. Richardson didn't. Besides, if he walked out of his life here, he did so without more than the clothing he had on. So much was missing from his effects, nothing more." "And Mcllvaine?" Harrigan smiled thinly. "He carried on. You couldn't expect him to do anything less. After all, he had worked most of his life trying to communicate with the worlds outside, and he had no intention of resigning his contact, no matter how much Richardson's disappearance upset him. For a while he believed that Guru had actually disintegrated Richardson; he offered that explanation, but by that time the dust had vanished, and he was laughed out of face. So he went back to the machine and Guru and the little excursions to Bixby's... from that star of yours?" asked Leopold, when. Mcllvaine came in. "They want to rejuvenate me," said Mcllvaine, with a certain shy pleasure. "What's that?" asked Alexander sourly. "They say they can make me young again. Like them up there. They never die. They just live so long, and then they rejuvenate, they begin all over. It's some kind of a process they have." "And I suppose they're planning to come down and fetch you up there and give you the works, is that it?" asked Alexander. "Well, no," answered Mcllvaine. "Guru says there's no need for that -- it can be done through the machine ; they can work it like the disintegrators; it puts you back to thirty or twenty or wherever you like." "Well, I'd like to be twenty-five myself again," admitted Leopold. "I'll tell you what, Mac," said Alexander. "You go ahead and try it; then come back and let us know how it works. If it does, we'll all sit in." "Better make your will first, though, just in case." "Oh, I did. This afternoon." Leopold choked back a snicker, "Don't take this thing too seriously, Mac. After all, we're short one of us now. We'd hate to lose you, too." Mcllvaine was touched. "Oh, I wouldn't change," he hastened to assure his friends. "I'd just be younger, that's all. They'll just work on me through the machine, and over-night I'll be rejuvenated." "That's certainly a little trick that's got it all over monkey glands," conceded Alexander, grinning. "Those little bugs on that star of yours have made scientific, progress, I'd say," said Leopold. "They're not bugs," said Mcllvaine with faint indignation. "They're people, maybe not just like you and me, but they're people just the same." He went home that night filled with anticipation. He had done just what he had promised himself he would do, arranging everything for his rejuvenation. Guru had been astonished to learn that people on Earth simply died when there was no necessity of doing so; he had made the offer to rejuvenate McIlvaine himself. Mcllvaine sat down to his machine and turned the complex knobs until he was en rapport with his dark star. He waited for a long time, it seemed, before he knew his contact had been closed. Guru came through. "Are you ready, Mcllvaine?' he asked soundlessly. "Yes. All ready," said Mcllvaine, trembling with eagerness. "Don't be alarmed now. It will take several hours," said Guru. "I'm not alarmed," answered Mcllvaine. And indeed he was not; he was filled with an exhilaration akin to mysticism, and he sat waiting for what he was certain must be the experience above all others in his prosaic existence. "Mcllvaine's disappearance coming so close on Richardson's gave us a beautiful story," said Harrigan. "The only trouble was, it wasn't new when the Globe got around to it. We had lost our informant in Richardson; it never occurred to Alexander or Leopold to telephone us or anyone about Mcllvaine's unaccountable absence from Bixby's. Finally, Leopold went over to Mcllvaine's house to find out whether the old fellow was sick. "A young fellow opened up. " 'Where's Mcllvaine?' Leopold asked. " 'I'm Mcllvaine,' the young fellow answered. " 'Thaddeus Mcllvaine,' Leopold explained. " 'That's my name,' was the only answer he got. " 'I mean the Thaddeus Mcllvaine who used to play cards with us over at Bixby's,' said Leopold. "He shook his head. 'Sorry, you must be looking for someone else.' " 'What' re you doing here?' Leopold asked then. " 'Why, I inherited what my uncle left,' said the young fellow. "And, sure enough, when Leopold talked to me and persuaded me to go around with him to Mcllvaine's lawyer, wc found that the old fellow had made a will and left everything to his nephew, a namesake. The stipulations were clear clear enough ; among them was the express wish that if anything happened to him, the elder Thaddeus Mcllvaine, of no matter what nature, but particularly something allowing a reasonable doubt of his death, the nephew was still to be permitted to take immediate possession of the property and effects." "Of course, you called on the nephew," I said. Harrigan nodded. "Sure. That was the indicated course, in any event. It was routine for both the press and the police. There was nothing suspicious about his story; it was straightforward enough, except for one or two little details. He never did give us any precise address-, he just mentioned Detroit once. I called up a friend on one of the papers there and put him up to looking up Thaddeus Mcllvaine; the only young man of that name he could find appeared to be the same man as the present inhabitant's uncle, though the description fit pretty well." "There was a resemblance, then?" "Oh, sure. One could have imagined that old Thaddeus Mcllvaine had looked somewhat like his nephew when he himself was a young man. But don't let the old man's rigmarole about rejuvenation make too deep an impression on you. The first thing the young fellow did was to get rid of that machine of his uncle's. Can you imagine his uncle having done something like that?" not help thinking what an ironic thing it would have been if there had been something to'McIlvaine's story, and in the process to which he had been subjected from out of space he had not been rejuvenated so much as just sent back in time, in which case he would have no memory of the machine nor of the use to which it had been put. It would have been as ironic for the inhabitants of Mcllvaine's star, too; they would doubtless have looked forward to keeping this contact with Earth open and failed to realize that Mcllvaine's construction differed appreciably from theirs. "He virtually junked it. Said he had no idea what it could be used for, and didn't know how to operate it." "And the telescope?" "Oh, he kept that. He said he had some interest in astronomy and meant to develop that if time permitted." "So much ran in the family, then." "Yes. More than that. Old Mcllvaine had a trick of seeming shy and self-conscious. So did this nephew of his. Wherever he came from, his origins must have been backward. I suspect that he was ashamed of them, and if I had to guess, I'd put him in the Kentucky hill-country or the Ozarks. Modern concepts seemed to be pretty well too much for him, and his thinking would have been considerably more natural at the turn of the century. "I had to see him several times. The police chivvied him a little, but not much; he was so obviously innocent of everything that there was nothing for them in him. And the search for the old man didn't last long; no one had seen him after that last night at Bixby's, and, since everyone had already long since concluded that he was mentally a little off center, it was easy to conclude that he had wandered away somewhere, probably an amnesiac. That he might have anticipated that is indicated in the hasty preparation of his will, which came out of the blue, said Barnevall, who drew it up for him. "I felt sorry for him." "For whom?" "The nephew. He seemed so lost, you know -- like a man who wanted to remember something, but couldn't. I noticed that several times when I tried to talk to him; I had the feeling each time that there was something he wanted desperately to say, it hovered always on the rim of his awareness, but somehow there was no bridge to it, no clue to put it into words. He tried so hard for something he couldn't put his finger on." "What became of him?" "Oh, he's still around. I think he found a job somewhere. As a matter of fact, I saw him just the other evening. He had apparently just come from work and he was standing in front of Bixby's with his face pressed to the window looking in. I came up nearby and watched him. Leopold and Alexander were sitting inside -- a couple of lonely old men looking out. And a lonely young man looking in. There was something in Mcllvaine's face -- that same thing I had noticed so often before, a kind of expression that seemed to say there was something he ought to know, something he ought to remember, to do, to say, but there was no way in which he could reach back to it. "Or forward," I said with a wry smile. "As you like," said Harrigan. "Pour me another, will you?" I did and he took it. "That poor devil!" he muttered. "He'd be happier if he could only go back where he came from." "Wouldn't we all?" I asked. "But nobody ever goes home again. Perhaps Mcllvaine never had a home like that." "You'd have thought so if you could have seen his face looking in at Leopold and Alexander, h, it may have been a trick of the streetlight there, it may have been my imagination. But it sticks to my memory, and I keep thinking how alike the two were -- old Mcllvaine trying so desperately to find someone who could believe him, and his nephew now trying just as hard to find someone to accept him or a place he could accept on the only terms he knows." By Ezra Shaw The Mastery of Fire sand years ago. prehistoric man already had the ability to make fire and fashion rude stones to help him in his fight for survival. His control of fire was probably the first great step in his freedom from his environment. Now, man was no longer restricted to a limited range of climates; his activities no longer depended only on the sun's light. At the beginning, man's effort was only to control and keep alive the fires that resulted from nature's forces -- as from lightning. But in tending and preserving the flames, he kept adding to his store of knowledge. The sacred fires that even today must never be allowed to die out -- as the fire of Vesta at Rome -- were also undoubtedly tended to by many of the ancient tribes. They are survivals of a time before man had learned to produce fire as he desired it. Together with the fossils of Pekin man and other extinct animals, very crude flakes of quartzite and other stones have also been found. These tools show that a man-like type of animal was adapting stones to assist in gaining his rudimentary needs. What the tools were made for, can only be guessed at. Most probably they served a multitude of purposes. Early man had to learn by dint of hard experience what stones were suitable for the making of tools, and how to chip them correctly. In the course of making tools, the earliest communities had to build up a scientific tradition, noting what the best stones were, where they could be expected to be found, how they should be handled. Man could not successfully start making special tools for each individual operation until he had mastered the technique of manufacture. Symbol of Progress has reached developments which have both helped and hindered him -- as science and superstition, materialism and asceticism, romanticism and classicism. But always there has been progress and this progress of man as a social human being has always been symbolized by his participation in the arts. The story of the discovery of the first prehistoric painting is one of the strangest incidents in the entire history of the arts. In #, the Marquis de Sautuola was exploring the cave of Altamire in the Cantabrian Mountains in the northern part of Spain. His little four-yearold daughter accompanied him on the outing. Not interested in her father's search for fossils, the little girl went on an exploring trip of her own. Crawling into a part of the cave that was so low that an adult would have normally passed it by, the child played for a while among the rocks by the light of her candle. Suddenly, she screamed. She had found a painting of a bull on the cave wall -- so realistically done that it frightened the child. When the Marquis announced his discovery to the scientific world, he was immediately denounced as a faker and an imposter. The art ' experts who examined the pictures insisted that it was impossible that such magnificent work could have been done by prehistoric savages. The Marquis was accused of having the painting done by a modem, talented artist. Fortunately, similar pictures were eventually discovered in the valley of the Dordogne in southwestern France, and the reputation of the Marquis' artistic honesty remains unblemished. Since then, pictures belonging to this same school have been found in caves all over southern France and northern Spain, and southern Italy. T HE question arises as to why prehistoric men painted their pictures in these dark and for the most part inaccessible caverns. Why did they invariably paint animals? There are several reasons for this. If you feared an enemy, you made for yourself an image of your enemy, stuck it full of pins to cause pain and death. Before going out on a hunt, the hunter invariably indulged in this practice to insure a successful chase. Primitive man's whole philosophy of life revolved around these animals. They were food -- life itselh Small wonder, then, that he resorted to all sorts of magic tricks to help him gain the upper hand. This type of superstition is still practiced today among many of our uncivilized tribes. Since primitive man's entire religion was shaped around animals, perhaps these dark caverns where the walls were covered with reproductions of bison and wolves were places of worship -- ancient temples where the elders of the tribe came together to bewitch the images so that food would be plentiful. No daylight ever penetrated the deep recesses of the limestone caves. No families ever lived there. Most of the caves were difficult of access, and the artist had to adopt the most uncomfortable positions to execute his art, sometimes lying flat on his back, sometimes standing on another's shoulders. The light was always artificial. Stone lamps, probably using fat for fuel and moss for wicks, have been found. All this pretty much points to the fact that there was a magic purpose to the art. Each creature so faithfully reproduced must have had a counterpart in the outside world that could be tasted as well as seen. As surely as the artist drew a bison in the dark cavern, so surely would there be a living bison in the steppes outside to be killed and eaten. To make sure of success, the artist occasionally drew his bison transfixed by a dart. At any rate, out of this strange wizardy came the first school of painting from men who were artists of the first order. The statuary which is today produced by the witch doctors of many of the African and Pacific island tribes, is very similar to that which has been handed down to us from prehistoric times. Invariably obscene and repulsive, the Images depicted have unusually fat bodies, with the sexual features exaggerated, and faces blank. Probably they indicate the fertility of the females -- the sexual charms of the men. According to authorities these figurines are completely lacking in the qualities which make us rate the work of the caveman painters and draftsmen with the best that has ever been done. The Eorly Sculptors . painting changed. The artist no longer tried to portray -- for instance -- an individual living stag. He was content now to use the fewest possible strokes in indicating the essential attributes by which a stag may be recognized. He seemed to have found that a shorthand sketch was just as effective as a life portrait in multiplying edible stags in the real world. And he seemed to suddenly have absorbed -- even if unconsciously -- the idea of abstract thinking. But this school of painting completely disappeared. Thousands of years passed before the world would again see art showing such an uncanny gift for observation. And it was during the ensuing thousand years that the human race learned the use of metals and fire for the purpose of changing lumps of clay into lasting pieces of pottery. The earliest pieces of bronze that have been so far discovered were in the central court of the ancient palace of Cnossus in Crete. They were done about fifteen centuries before the birth of Christ. Bronze had already been brought to Crete by the Phoenicians. It had already found its way to Egypt. But hardly had bronze appeared, when iron came into the picture. For all practical purposes, it soon became the leading metal, since it was much harder, and much easier to convert into steel. Yet, surprisingly enough, the ornaments of the Iron Age were inferior artistically to those of the Stone Age. The anthropologists have stated that the skulls found in the earlier graves seem to have belonged to a much more intelligent race of people than those who date back to a more recent age. This is borne out by the fact that the artists of the Stone Age showed a much greater deftness and much more imagination in the way they solved their problems than the men of the Iron Age who lived thousands of years later. Evolution does not necessarily mean that the superior types will always survive. From the point of view of civilization, the superior types are quite often completely exterminated by their inferior neighbors who happen to be less civilized but are much better at the art of war. In this case, the facts seem to hint at some such development. After the late Stone Age there was a very definite and very sudden slump in the artistic output of the human race. A LL art reflects not merely the . economic surroundings of the artist but also his geographical background. An Eskimo may have a profound natural gift for sculpture, but during the greater part of each year he will have to content himself with cutting his monuments out of ice. An Egyptian, on the other hand, was not so restricted. Prehistoric man must have been a most unappetizing looking individual judging by the standards we have today. Yet, in the field of art, he achieved results which show him to be not only a superior craftsman, but to be endowed also with a tremendous amount of imagination. Art is as old as the human race. Itbelongs to no particular period or group. There has never been a race that was completely without artistic expression. Personalities in Science Fiction (Continued from page #) cruiting of air raid wardens of which Thayer does not approve. Thayer's fight with the air raid wardens seems almost a fixation. He calls them "pismires in white helmets" ; advocates rebellion against civil defense by urging the membership to turn on lights during blackouts and to refuse to cooperate generally. The whole thing would be amusing, were it not so serious. Surely, the memory of Charles Fort deserves better. His was one of the most original minds of this era; one which evolved some fascinating concepts. Evidence of the things of which he wrote continues to pile up. It all goes on as before, but now, no one is looking. The society which was founded to carry on after Fort is snarling at air raid wardens and pursuing cheap political ends. So the prophet is without honor in his own society. The "gargantuan laughter" is stilled, and Fort's name declines in the West. -- Robert Barbour Johnson Have you ever written science fiction? Have your stories been rejected? Herein may lie the reason. The Smiler By Albert Hernhunter Y our name?' "Cole. Martin Cole." "Your profession?" "A very important one. I am a literary agent specializing in science-fiction. I sell the work of various authors to magazine and book pubishers." The Coroner paused to study Cole; to ponder the thin, mirthless smile. The Coroner said, "Mr. Cole, this inquest has been called to look into the death of one Sanford Smith, who was found near your home with a gun in his hand and a bullet in his brain. The theory of suicide has been -- " " -- rather hard to rationalize?" The Coroner blinked. "You could put it that way." "I would put it even stronger. The theory is obviously ridiculous. It was a weak cover-up. The best I could do under the circumstances." "You are saying that you killed Sanford Smith?" "Of course." The Coroner glanced at his sixman jury, at the two police officers, at the scattering of spectators. They all seemed stunned. Even the reporter sent to cover the hearing made no move toward the telephone. The Coroner could think of only the obvious question: "Why did you kill him?" "He was dangerous to us." "Whom do you mean by us?" "We Martians, who plan to take over your world." The Coroner was disappointed. A lunatic. But a lunatic can murder. Best to proceed, the coroner thought. "I was not aware that we have Martians to contend with." "If I'd had the right weapon to use on Cole, you wouldn't be aware of it now. We still exercise caution." The Coroner felt a certain pity. "Why did you kill Smith?" "We Martians have found science-fiction writers to be our greatest danger. Through the medium of imaginative fiction, such writers have more than once revealed our plans. If the public suddenly realized that -- " killed Smith because he revealed something in his writings?" "Yes. He refused to take 'my word that it was unsalable. He threatened to submit it direct. It was vital material." "But there are many other such writers. You can't control -- " "We control ninety percent of the output. We have concentrated on the field and all of the science fiction agencies are in our hands. This control was imperative." "I see." The Coroner spoke in the gentle tones one uses with the insane. "Any writing dangerous to your cause is deleted or changed by the agents." "Not exactly. The agent usually persuades the writer to make any such changes, as the agent is considered an authority on what will or will not sell." "The writers always agree?" "Not .always. If stubbornness is encountered, the agent merely shelves the manuscript and tells the writer it has been repeatedly rejected." The Coroner glanced at the two policemen. Both were obviously puzzled. They returned the Coroner's look, apparently ready to move on his order. The thin, mirthless smile was still on Cole's lips. Maniacal violence could lie just behind it. Possibly Cole was armed. Better to play for time-s-try to quiet the madness within. The Coroner continued speaking. "You Martians have infiltrated other fields also?" "Oh yes. We are in government, industry, education. We are everywhere. We have, of course, concentrated mainly upon the ranks of labor and in the masses of ordinary, everyday people. It is from these sources that we will draw our shock troops when the time comes." "That time will be -- ?" "Soon, very soon." The Coroner could not forebear a smile. "You find the science fiction writers more dangerous than the true scientists?" "Oh yes. The scientific mind tends to reject anything science disproves." There was now a mocking edge to Cole's voice. "Science can easily prove we do not exist." "But the science fiction writer?"  "The danger from the imaginative mind cannot be overestimated." The Coroner knew he must soon order the officers to lay hands upon this madman. He regretted his own lack of experience with such situations. He tried to put a soothing, confidential note into his voice. "You said a moment ago that if you'd had the right kind of weapon to use on Smith -- " Cole reached into his pocket and brought out what appeared to be a fountain pen. "This. It kills instantly and leaves no mark whatever. Heart failure is invariably stated as the cause of death." The Coroner felt better. Obviously, Cole was not armed. As the Coroner raised a hand to signal the officers, Cole said, "You understand, of course, that I can't let you live." "Take this man into custody." The police officers did not move. The Coroner turned on them sharply. They were smiling. Cole pointed the fountain pen. The Coroner felt a sharp chill on his flesh. He looked at the jury, at the newspaperman, the spectators. They were all smiling cold, thin, terrible smiles... A short time later, the newspaperman phoned in his story. The afternoon editions carried it: Shortly after this morning's inquest, which resulted in a jury verdict of suicide in the case of Sanford Smith, Coroner James Bell dropped dead of heartfailure in the hearing room of the County building. Mr. Bell leaves a wife and -- Extra Gift Subscriptions Only # By this time you know whether you like IF or not. You also know that don't know is that, if you include a gift subscription along with your own, it costs only #, or both subscriptions for six bucks! Thus, two can enjoy IF cheaper than one! Just fill in below and mail with remittance to IF Magazine, Kingston, New York. Send Gift Subscription to: I "PoAtwcut I Dear Paul: Though we have only just met, I feel as if I'd known you all my life, etc. If that salutation and first sentence sounds like the beginning of a love letter, well, why not? It is. To quote a famous love song: "IF" I Loved You. Of course you couldn't have missed, for the great god, Big Name, was on your side, and the biggest names I've seen in stf were all there together. However, in all fairness, let me say that these authors have given you the cream of the stuff that made them worthy of their big names. I trembled in the aspect of IIow'ard Browne's story. I kept waiting for Kirk to come crashing back through space in time to arrest the hand of the man at the switch, And when he didn't I felt as though I'd been punched in the belly... The Stowaway struck a responsive chord in me. I'm always hoping a flying saucer will land plop in front of me some day and take me off into space and I will be the very first to see what's up there. I'd even like to go with the big brass, but I'd only be in the way, for I have no special skills or knowledge that would help except I bake a mean apple pie. Would that help? Bitter Victory was interesting since I too am a telepath. I say to my husband on Wednesday night, "Dear " and he says, "Okay." Then he takes down the garbage. I must develop it for distance. Never Underestimate. What happened to Jenny should happen to me! Black Eyes and the Daily Grind was highly improbable and I didn't believe a word of it but I thought it was cute. Of StegneVs Folly was okay. If my seven-month-old daughter starts pushing around pianos, I might go back and read it again. The Hell Ship. Orchids to this. I'm always happy to see the maligned and oppressed get the upper just rewards. The Old Martians presented no triple problem to me. The ending was definite enough. However, if Herb had escaped, then I would have had my choice. I really felt all along that Joe believed Herb was not insane. Am I supposed to wonder if Herb was an old Martian. Well, maybe. On to the departments! Here is where you really shine, and your magnitude will, nay must, increase with every issue. Do you know that I read everything else in a magazine first, before I read the stories? This is so those little notes about any certain story will increase my enjoyment of same. I start off by seeing what the editor has to say and, Paul, you said it and I'm. glad. I'm happy that you don't intend to bow to the great god Plot. Tragedies, Comedies, bring 'em on. My jaws are slavering to devour them. But no serials, please. The Guest Editorial was interesting and the Citation timely, for just as I put down the book, Tales of Tomorrow came on and I did what you said and didn't miss it. It was Dune Roller and I'd read it in said!) The science briefs were of interest to my husband who doesn't like stf, but who docs like the gurruls on the covers of stf mags. This brings us to The Postman Cometh and the very thought of winning an original MS makes little shivers go up and down my back... Besides the fact that yours is a fine magazine there is the thrill for me of being in on the ground floor of something big. When a convert to stf tries to catch up on the classics and back issues of various stf mags, he usually finds it a hopeless and expensive job. For instance, it would be quite a feat to acquire every issue of Amazing from Vol. #, No. I on up to today. But readers of IF will find no such strain on their budget and resourcefulness. They can start this very minute. I for one am going to. serve noodles instead of meat to my family until I've salvaged the subscription price to your mag. Then, twenty-five years from now, I'll be #, but my library of IF will be priceless and this March # issue will be a golden possession among my souvenirs. And if I'm lucky enough to win an original MS ! ! ! ! I'll close now, although I hate to go. I can't promise to wait on the sidewalk wrapped in a blanket for your next issue, but I'll get it, never fear. Anyway, I'll probably have subscribed by then. Well, dam it, I can't wait! Here's the egg money, boys, that old hen must still be around someplace. Did I keep you in suspense? I was gonna send it all the time. , -- Mrs. Francis Huber Irvington, N. J.   #I Dear Sir: I will most certainly try two or three (of your issues) on for size; and if they prove to be comparable in quality to Galaxy and Astounding, I'll subscribe. -- W. Boyd Wichita, Kansas #  Dear Ed: I have just finished reading your first issue and am very satisfied with it. The small size, the cut edges, along with the fine stories, make it unusual in its field. Howard Browne's Twelve Times Zero was excellently done, although the use of outside watchers as a main theme is becoming too common. The front cover which illustrates a scene from this lead novel is well done, the only fault being ter than avera but still not of the quality one would expect of Phillips, Sturgeon, or Shaver. The only completely good parts of your magazine are the features. They are wonderful. -- Martin Lewkowicz Fair Lawn, N. J.    Dear Sir: Thought I'd drop you a line and tell you how your mag stacks up with the rest... With stories by and Sturgeon, how could it miss? Most magazines have one or two good names in them, but your first issue had five... You were smart to leave out the books and the reviews, as you say, they are well covered. Personalities in Science Fiction is a honey of an idea...' The title, IF, is better Your art work could be improved. I hope to say I am the first to congratulate you on a very fine magazine. If I am not the first I certainly won't be the lasti -- Basil Guiley Warren, Penn.    Dear Paul: Your letter and IF received... , The magazine is pretty good. I'm not familiar with this type of stuff, but I read it through and found it held my attention with no effort on my part. No need to comment on each story because I'm no judge. Would have enjoyed Never Underestimate immensely, if properly done. (Ed. note: You listening, Ted?) The idea had such possibilities -- too good to be written down. Your editorial was okay and follows the pattern of editors in the pulp, Ellery Queen's mag. (Ed. note: ?????) which we get through the generosity of some guests we had last summer. Am interested in learning how many of your readers will write to remind you that Romeo really did get there in time. If enough of them catch you on that one, you might try "writing up" a little. Also, the word "gotten", is obsolete in any form. The cover. The picture contains four focal points of interest -- too many for its purpose. Two at the most, because you must realize the necessity of centering the interest of a prospective reader. This is the purpose of the picture on the cover... (Ed. note: Yes sir -- sorry sir; we'll do better next time, sir.) All in all, though, a very good book. -- Joseph E. F airman Benedict, Nebraska The above ' came from the editor's younger brother -- the only real "brain" in the family.    Dear Mr. Fairman: My first impression of IF as I leafed through it... was an excellent one... I thought your editorial policy was wonderfully well put and your Personality, Guest editorial, and Citation were interesting. I settled down to read Howard Browne's Twelve Times Zero with pleasant anticipation. Then it happened. I hadn't previously noted the boxed-off comment on the second page of his story, so before proceding further, I read it. And the excellent first impression you created, went right out the window. I just can't believe that the same person who wrote the excellently thought out editorial, penned the -- I almost said, asinine -- statement that Amazing Stories is the best stf mag your money can buy... All I can say is that if your plug of Amazing was part payment for Twelve Times Zero, you got the zero... -- Richard H. Jamison St. Louis #, Mo. (We hasten to reassure Mr. Jamison on two points: Howard Browne was paid in cash for his lead novel -- not partially in plugs. Also, the same person who wrote the editorial for the first issue of IF, did write the boxed-in comment on page two of the story.)    Sirs: I wish you luck in the field of stf. (It) can stand new publications. Your stories are good, they hold my interest. However, I'm betting you don't enjoy wide popularity. Why? it's hard to say. Only that your mag leaves a feeling of having read a collection of good stories, but not a collection of good stories published by IF. I might say you don't impress me as having a personality. Perhaps you will develop one... Charles Recour, in Science Briefs, quotes the hydrogen atom as reversing its spin and thus emitting a radio impulse. Why? Where can I find out about this? Guess that's about all...Again wishing you luck. -- Harold V. Anderson Philadelphia #, Pa.    Dear Ed: Congratulations on a fine first issue. I enjoyed all your stories. I ask no more than that you keep up to the standard you set in this issue. Here are my ratings:  #. The Stowaway by Heiner. More... #. Never U nderestimate by Sturgeon. Nice twist. #. B.E. and the D.G. by Lesser. Funny. #. Twelve Times Zero by Browne. Good, but not his best. #. Of StegnePs Folly by Shaver. This is the man to round out a mag. #. The Hell Ship by Rap. 'Nough said. Could have been further developed-. #. Bitter Victory by Miller. Last but not least. Suggestions : Inside covers are nice for some sort of picture article on the authors and some sort of technical article. Get a cover by Cartier, Bok, Orban, or Bonestell. Get a story by Bradbury, Heinlen, de Camp, Brown. Don't have your magazine mixed up with the sexy cover arguments. They have special magazines for people who go for that stuff. Nuff said. With great expectations for the future, Cambridge #, Mass.     Dear Paul: This is my first letter to any magazine. Feel flattered? My husband and I are avid stf fans. Read Amazing, Fantastic, Other Worlds, Imagination, and Galaxy. Imagine my surprise to see a new mag on the newsstand yesterday. Further surprise -- edited by you -- and all my favorite authors except two, Bradbury and Heinlein... Truthfully, it's hard to decide which story I liked best. They were all good... So I'll end with congratulations on, the birth of IF, and may it enjoy a long and fruitful life. -- Lucretia Laflin Somerville, Mass. #  Deuel, Robert Katson, Richard Hadden, Horace Christopher, and the many, many others who took the trouble to write us. Their letters are no less appreciated than those published. But there just isn't room for more in this issue. test: the judges had a tough time and frankly I'm glad I wasn't one of them. They have awarded the The Old Martians to Terry Carr of # Cambridge Street, San Francisco, California. Of Stegner's Folly by Shaver goes to Lewis Merkelsan of # Hillhaven Avenue, Tujunga, Cal. Sturgeon's Never Underestimate was won by Thomas Reamy of Route #, Box #-E, Ft. Worth, Texas. I know the judges worked hard, because I spent a little time watching them work, and I know their efforts were sincere and conscientious. To those who didn't win, thanks for your letters. I wish we could aw-ard a manuscript to everyone. reading entertainment! Written by America's outstanding reporters, here is a magazine devoted to the true mystery of real life -- stories that will make your hair stand on end, that will enthrall you, that will challenge your credibility, that will make you laugh -- and yet every one of them actually happened! You'll never know how completely strange and utterly fascinating this world really is until you have read this remarkable magazine!... Just ask your nearest news dealer for a copy of -- qf #tt Aptfay  By Stanley Mullen All Stories New and Complete Publisher Editor IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Ckimpany, Inc., # Lord St., Buffal N. Y. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., Kingston, N. Y. Application for Entry as Second Class matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York, pending. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction. Any simility to actual persons is coincidental. #c a copy. Printed in U.S.A. it's too late to write one. It's two a. m. on a Monday morning -- the Monday this issue has to go to the printer. I had an editorial. But I'm in Kingston and the editorial is lying on the table down in Patterson. That's forty miles from here and there isn't time to go get it. The rest of the issue is all ready to go. I left Patterson Saturday and drove down to New York City and took the readied manuscripts with me. Saturday evening I went up to see Horace Gold, the guy that puts out a stf mag called Galaxy. He lives in a big ant hill on Fourteenth Street and a lot of people drop in. We killed some time and I gave him a copy -- for free -- of IF, and then I went out and found a parking ticket on my car. Fifteen bucks. Fifteen bucks, they charge in that town for putting your car in the wrong place! They were having a little financial trouble, but I sent in a check for the fine, so I guess their money matters are all straightened out now. A nyhow, I drove straight up here to Kingston from Manhattan and didn't stop off at Patterson, so that's why I haven't got an editorial. My car runs pretty good. I've only had it a couple of months. It's a # Cadillac, but it had only been driven a few thousand miles and it's just like new and I got a terri#c bargain on it. I I was going to buy a Ford or a Chevy, but the man came along with this one and showed me where it's a lot more economical in the long run. This car, he said, will last me all my life, where a light car falls to pieces after about thirty years. You take care of a Cadillac and it will never let you down. In the long run you save a lot of money. What a line of malarky! Sure -- take care of it and it'll take care of you. New tires at forty bucks a throw. High test gas -- only the best. Drain the crankcase every thousand miles. And use only tjie best oil -- the kind they bring around in an armoured car. Brother, I've been had! If tha old # Dodge I came east iiS hadn't dropped its motor in th middle of the road, I'd still be a happy guy. cause it was a pretty good one. I spent a lot of time on it. It was all about how lucky we are to be living now -- in this fantastic, scientific age. About all the things we have -- and take for granted -- that are so wonderful. Not the big things necessarily. The little things. The allegedly common ordinary things. Like, for instance, a tooth brush and a tube of tooth paste and a visit to a dentist. It's a matter of historical record that Queen Elizabeth, back around the Middle Ages, who had everything the people of that time could devise, always held a fan in front of her face when she talked. That was to cover her decayed and blackened teeth. The queen of a great nation, and when her teeth went, they went. There was nothing on the face of the earth that could be done about it. So you and I have got what kings and queens w#uld have given fortunes to possess. A clean and efficient set of teeth. Even if they're the kind you take out at night -- they're still clean and efficient. You should go to the museum sometime and see what George Washington had to put up withi A S A matter of fact, the premise can be cut a lot finer. Think how lucky you and I are .to be Americans and live in the United States. Have you, as an example, ever been hungry? By that I don't mean just ready for dinner. I mean really hungry deep down in the bone -- down to the point where getting something to eat is the most important single ambition of life. By far the majority of people on this earth are that way all the time. today -- this minute -- who have never, at any time in their lives, had enough to eat. There are people living today who have never seen a bar of soap, have never seen a moving picture show ; have never tasted an ice cream soda or a piece of roast beef. The point is worth a moment's thankfulness for being who you are -- living in the place you are -- in these times of pure magic. That's what the editorial was about and it was a pretty good one. I wish I had it here. good stories in this issue. If you don't get a chance to read anything else in the book, don't miss Charley Beaumont's The Beautiful People. This will be a good chance to see how our tastes jibe. I think the yarn has everything. Incidentally, the Mari Wolf that wrote An Empty Bottle, is Rog I don't know who T. D. Hamm is. I bought his Last Supper through an agent, but it's one of ever read. The short-short is supposed to be the hardest type of fiction to do. I think it must be, because you find a good one once in a blue moon. If Last Supper isn't snapped up for an anthology. I'll be badly mistaken. By the way, Walt Miller's It Takes A Thief was grabbed by Shasta for their # Anthology. It appeared in the May issue of IF. My favorite in that issue was Infinites Child by DeVet. Sorry about not having the editorial. I'll run it next issue if I can find it. -- pwf MM ;i  iJlg i I mtTtvfiw  ,'"  ?nH#SW jnm Sjsj flJJnlfKlki m Mary was a misfit. She didn't want to be beautiful. And she wasted time doing mad things -- like eating and sleeping. The Beautiful People By Charles Beaumont M ary sat quietly and watched tearing flesh and ripping hones, the handsome man's legs Mary closed her eyes, blown off ; watched further as the "Mother." great ship began to crumple and Mrs. Cuberle glanced up from break into small pieces in the midher magazine, die of the blazing night. She fidget"Hmm?" ed slightly as the men and the parts "Do we have to wait much longof the men came floating dreamily er?" through the wreckage out into the "I don't think so. Why?" awful silence. And when the meMary said nothing but looked at teorite shower came upon the men, the moving wall. gouging holes through everything, "Oh, that." Mrs. Cuberle laughed and shook her head. "Thai tired old thing. Read a magazine, Mary, like I'rn doing. We've all seen that "Does it have to be on. Mother?" "Well, nobody seems to be watching. I don't think the doctor would mind if I switched it off." Mrs. Cuberle rose from the couch and walked to the wall. She depressed a little button and the life went from the wall, flickering and glowing. Mary opened her eyes. "Honestly," Mrs. Cuberle said to a woman sitting beside her, "you'd think they'd try to get something else. We might as well go to the museum and watch the first landing on Mars. The Mayoraka Disaster -- really!" The Woman replied without distracting her eyes from the magazine page. "It's the doctor's idea. Psychological." Mrs. Cuberle opened her mouth and moved her head up and down knowingly. "Ohhh. I should have known there was some reason. Still, who watches it?" "The children do. Makes them think, makes them grateful or something." "Ohhh." "Psychological." Mary picked up a magazine and leafed through the pages. All photographs, of women and men. Women like Mother and like the others in the room; slender, tanned, shapely, beautiful women; and men with large muscles and shiny hair. Worfien and men, all looking alike, all perfect and beautiful. She folded the magazine and wondered how to answer the questions that wduld be asked. "Mother -- " "Gracious, what is it now! Can't you sit still for a minute?" "But we've been here three hours." Mrs. Cuberle sniffed. "Do -- do I really have to?" "Now don't be silly, Mary. After those terrible things you told me, of course you do." An olive-skinned woman in a transparent white uniform came into the reception room. "Cuberle. Mrs.iZena Cuberle?" "Yes.". "Doctor will see you now." Mrs. Cuberle took Mary's hand and they walked behind the nurse down a long corridor. A man who seemed in his middle twenties looked up from a desk. He smiled and gestured toward two adjoining chairs. "Well -- well." "Doctor Hortel, I -- " T he doctor snapped his fingers. "Of course, I know. Your daughter. Ha ha, I certainly do know your trouble. Get so many of them nowadays -- takes up most of my time." "You do?" asked Mrs. Cuberle. "Frankly, it had begun to upset me." "Upset? Hmm. Not good. Not good at all. Ah, but then -- if people did not get upset, we psychiatrists would be out of a job, eh? Go the way of the early M. D. But, I assure you, I need hear no more." He turned his handsome face to Mary. "Little girl, how old are you?" "Eighteen, sir." "Oh, a real bit of impatience. It's just about time, of course. What might your name be?" "Mary." "Charming! And so unusual. Well now, Mary, may I say that I understand your problem -- underr stand it thoroughly?" Mrs. Cuberle smiled and smoothed the sequins on her blouse. "Madam, you have no idea how many there are these days. Sometimes it preys on their minds so that it affects them physically, even mentally. Makes them act strange, say peculiar, unexpected things. One little girl I recall was so distraught she did nothing but brood all day long. Can you imagine!" "That's what Mary does. When she finally told me, doctor, I thought she had gone -- you know." "That bad, eh? Afraid we'll have to start a re-education program, very soon, or they'll all be like this. I believe I'll suggest it to the senator day after tomorrow.'! "I don't quite understand, doctor." "Simply, Mrs. Cuberle, that the children have got to be thoroughly instructed. Thoroughly. Too much is taken for granted and childish minds somehow refuse to accept things without definite reason. Children have become far too intellectual, which, as I trus I, needn't remind you, is a dangerous thing." "Yes, but what has this to do with" "With Mary? Everything, of course. Mary, like half the sixteen, seventeen and eighteen year olds today, has begun to feel acutely selfconscious. She feels that her body has developed sufficiently for the Transformation -- which of course it has not, not quite yet -- and she cannot understand the complex reasons that compel her to wait until some future date. Mary looks at you, at the women all about her, at the pictures, and then she looks into a mirror. From pure perfection of body, face, limbs, pigmentation, carriage, stance, from simon-pure perfection, if I may be allowed the expression, she sees herself and is horrified. Isn't that so, my dear child? Of course -- of course. She asks herself, why must I be hideous, unbalanced, oversize, undersize, full of revolting skin eruptions, badly schemed organically? In short, Mary is tired of being a monster and is overly anxious to achieve what almost everyone else has already achieved." "But -- " said Mrs. Cuberle. "This much you understand, doubtless. Now, Mary, what you object to is that our society offers you, and the others like you, no convincing logic on the side of waiting until age nineteen. It is all taken for granted, and you want to know why! It is that simple. A non-technical explanation will not suffice -- mercy no! The modern child wants facts, solid technical data, to satisfy her every question. And that, as you can both see, will take a good deal of reorganizing." "But -- " said Mary. "The child is upset, nervous, tense; she acts strange, peculiar, odd, worries you and makes herself ill because it is beyond our meagre powers to put it across. I tell you, what we need is a whole new basis for learning. And, that will take doing. It will take doing, Mrs. Cuberle. Now, don't you worry about Mary, and don't you worry, child. I'll prescribe some pills and -- " "No, no, doctor! You're all mixed up," cried Mrs. Cuberle. "I beg your pardon. Madam?" "What I mean is, you've got it wrong. Tell him, Mary, tell the doctor what you told me." Mary shifted uneasily in the chair. "It's that -- I don't want it." The doctor's well-proportioned jaw dropped. "Would you please repeat that?" "I said, I don't want the Transformation." "D -- Don'f want it?" "You see? She told me. That's why I came to you." The doctor looked at Mary suspiciously. "But that's impossible! I have never heard of such a thing. Little girl, you are playing a joke!" Mary nodded negatively. "See, doctor. What can it be?" Mrs. Cuberle rose and began to pace. tongue and took from a small cupboard a black box covered with buttons and dials and wire, "Oh no, you don't think -- I mean, could it?" "We shall soon see." The doctor revolved a number of dials and studied the single bulb in the center of the box. It did not flicker. He removed handles from Mary's head. "Dear me," the doctor said, "dear me. Your daughter is perfectly sane, Mrs. Cuberle." "Well, then what is it?" "Perhaps she is lying. We haven't completely eliminated that factor as yet; it slips into certain organisms." More tests. More machines and more negative results. Mary pushed her foot in a circle on the floor. When the doctor put his hands to her shoulders, she looked up pleasantly. "Little girl," said the handsome man, "do you actually mean to tell us that you prefer that body?" "Yes sir." "May I ask why." "I like it. It's -- hard to explain, but it's me and that's what I like. Not the looks, maybe, but the me." "You can look in the mirror and see yourself, then look at -- well, at your mother and be content?" "Yes, sir." Mary thought of her reasons; fuzzy, vague, but very definitely there. Maybe she had said the reason. No. Only a part of it. "Mrs. Cuberle," the doctor said, "I suggest that your husband have a long talk with Mary." "My husband is dead. That affair near Ganymede, I believe. Something like that." -' "Oh, splendid. Rocket man, eh? Very interesting organisms. Something always seems to happen to rocket men, in one way or another. But -- I suppose we should do something." The doctor scratched his jaw. "When did she first start talking this way," he asked. "Oh, for quite some time. I used to think it was because she was such a baby. But lately, the time getting so close and all, I thought I'd better see you." "Of course, yes, very wise. Er -- does she. also do odd things?" "Well, I found her on the second level one night. She was lying on the floor and when I asked her what she was doing, she said she was trying to sleep." Mary flinched. She was sorry, in a way, that Mother had found that out. "To -- did you say 'sleep'?" "That's right." "Now where could she have picked that up?" "No idea." "Mary, don't you know that nobody sleeps anymore? That we have an infinitely greater life-span than our poor ancestors now that the wasteful state of unconsciousness has been conquered? Child, have you actually slept? No one knows how anymore." "No sir, but I almost did." The doctor sighed. "But, it's unheard of! How could you begin to try to do something people have forgotten entirely about?" "The way it was described in the book, it sounded nice, that's all." Mary was feeling very uncomfortable now. Home and no talking man in a foolish white gown... "Book, book? Are there books at your Unit, Madam?" "There could be -- I haven't cleaned up in a while." "That is certainly peculiar. I haven't seen a book for years. Not since '#." Mary began to fidget and stare nervously about. "But with the tapes, why should you try and read books -- where did you get them?" "Daddy did. He got them from his father and so did Grandpa. He said they're better than the tapes and he was right." Mrs. Cuberle flushed. "My husband was a little strange. Doctor Hortel. He kept those things despite everything I said. "Dear me, I -- excuse me." The muscular, black-haired doctor walked to another cabinet and selected from the shelf a bottle. From the bottle he took two large pills and swallow'ed them. "Sleep -- books -- doesn't want the Transformation -- Mrs. Cuberle, my dear good woman, this is grave. Doesn't want the Transformation. I would appreciate it if you would change psychiatrists ; I am very busy and, uh, this is somewhat specialized. I suggest Centraldome. Many fine doctors there. Goodbye." The doctor turned and sat down in a large chair and folded his hands. Mary watched him and wondered why the simple statements should have so changed things. But the doctor did not move from the chair. "Well!" said Mrs. Cuberle and walked quickly from the room. The man's legs were being blown off again as they left the reception room. M ary considered the reflection in the mirrored wall. She sat op the floor and looked at different angles of herself: profile, full-face, full length, naked, clothed. Then she took up the magazine and studied it. She sighed. "Mirror, mirror on the wall -- " The words came haltingly to her mind and from her lips. She hadn't read them, she recalled. Daddy had said them, quoted them as he put it. But they too were lines from a book -- "who is the fairest of -- " A picture of Mother sat upon the dresser and Mary considered this now. Looked for a long time at the slender, feminine neck. The golden skin, smooth and without blemish, without wrinkles and without age. The dark brown eyes and the thin tapers of eyebrows, the long black lashes, set evenly, so that each half of the face corresponded precisely. The half-parted mouth, a violet tint against the gold, the white, white teeth, even, sparkling. Mother. Beautiful, Transformed Mother. And back again to the mirror. " -- of them all . , ." The image of a rather chubby girl, without lines of rhythm or grace, without perfection. Splotchy skin full of little holes, puffs in the cheeks, red eruptions on the forehead. Perspiration, shapeless lir flowing onto shapeless shoulders down a shapeless body. Like all of them, before the Transformation. Did they all look like this, before? Did Mother, even? Mary thought hard, trying to remember exactly what Daddy and Grandpa had said, why they said the Transformation was a bad thing, and why she believed and agreed with them so strongly. It made little sense, but they were right. They were right! And one day, she would understand completely. Mrs. Cuberle slammed the door angrily and Mary jumped to her feet. She hadn't forgotten about it. "The way you upset Dr. Hortel. ' He won't even see me anymore, and these traumas are getting horrible. I'll have to get that awful Dr. Wagoner." "Sorry -- " Mrs. Cuberle sat on the couch and crossed her legs carefully. "What in the world were you doing on the floor?" "Trying to sleep." "Now, I won't hear of it! You've got to stop it! You know you're not insane. Why should you want to do such a silly thing?" "The books. And Daddy told me about it." "And you mustn't read those terrible things." "Why -- is there a law against them?" "Well, no, but people tired of books when the tapes came in. You know that. The house is full of tapes; anything you want." Mary stuck out her lower lip. "They're no fun. All about the Wars and the colonizations." "And I suppose books are fun?" "Yes. They are." "And that's where you got this idiotic notion that you don't want the Transformation, isn't it? Of course it is. Well, we'll see to that!" and took the books from the corner and from the closet and filled her arms with them. She looked everywhere in the room and gathered the old rotten volumes. These she carried from the room and threw into the elevator. A button guided the doors shut. "I thought you'd do that," Mary said. "That's why I hid most of the good ones. Where you'll never find them." Mrs. Cubgrle put a satin handkerchief to her eyes and began to weep. "Just look at you. Look. I don'tknow what I ever did to deserve this!" "Deserve what, Mother? What am I doing that's so wrong?" Mary's mind rippled in a confused stream. "What!" Mrs. Cuberle screamed, "What! Do you think I want people to point to you and say I'm the mother of an idiot? That's what they'll say, you'll see. Or," she looked up hopefully, "have you changed your mind?" "No." The vague reasons, longing to be put into words. "It doesn't hurt. They just take off a little skin and put some on and give you pills and electronic treatments and things like that. It doesn't take more than a week." "No." The reason. "Don't you want to be beautiful, like other people -- like me? Look at your friend Shala, she's getting her Transformation next month. And she's almost pretty now." "Mother, I don't care -- " "If it's the bones you're worried about, well, that doesn't hurt. They give you a shot and when you wake up, everything's moulded right. Everything, to suit the personality." ' "I don't care, I don't care." "But why?" "I like me the way I am." Almost -- almost exactly. But not quite. Part of it, however. Part of what Daddy and Grandpa meant. "But you're so ugly, dear! Like Dr. Hortel said. "And Mr. Willmes, at the factory. He told some people he thought you were the ugliest girl he'd ever seen. Says he'll be thankful when you have your Transformation. And what if he hears of all this, what'll happen then?" "Daddy said I was beautiful." "Well really, dear. You do have eyes." "Daddy said that real beauty is only skin deep. He said a lot of things like that and when I read the books I felt the same way. I guess I don't want to look like everybody else, that's all." No, that's not it. Not at all it. "That man had too much to do with you. You'll notice that he had his Transformation, though!" "But he was sorry. He told me that if he had it to do over again, he'd never do it. He said for me to be stronger than he was." "Weli, I won't have it. You're not going to get away with this, young lady. After all, I am your mother." , A bulb flickered in the bathroom and Mrs. Cuberle walked uncertainly to the cabinet. She took out a little cardboard box. "Time for lunch." Mary nodded. That was another thing the books talked about, which the tapes did not. Lunch seemed to be something special long ago, or at least different. The books talked of strange ways of putting a load of things into the mouth and chewing these things. Enjoying them. Strange and somehow wonderful. "And you'd better get ready for work." "Yes, Mother." T he office was quiet and without shadows. The walls gave off a steady luminescence, distributed the light evenly upon all the desks and tables. And it was neither hot nor cold. Mary held the ruler firmly and allowed the pen to travel down the metal edge effortlessly. The new black lines were small and accurate. She tipped her head, compared the notes beside her to the plan she was working on. She noticed the beautiful people looking at her more furtively than before, and she wondered about this as she made her lines. A tall man rose from his desk in the rear of the office and walked down the aisle to Mary's table. He surveyed her work, allowing his eyes to travel cautiously from her face to the draft. Mary looked around. "Nice job," said the man. "Thank you, Mr. Willmes." "Dralich shouldn't have anything to complain about. That crane should hold the whole damn city." "It's, very good alloy, sir." "Yeah. Say, kid, you got a minute?" "Yes sir." "Let's go into Mullinson's office." The big handsome man led the way into a small cubby-hole of a room. He motioned to a chair and sat on the edge of one desk. "Kid, I never was one to beat around the bush. Somebody called in little while ago, gave me some crazy story about you not wanting the Transformation.". Mary said "Oh." Daddy had said it would have to happen, some day. This must be what he meant. "I would've told them they were way off the beam, but I wanted to talk to you first, get it straight." "Well, sir, it's true. I don't. I want to stay this way." The man looked at Mary and then coughed, embarrassedly. "What the hell -- excuse me, kid, but -- I don't exactly get it. You, uh, you saw the psychiatrist?" "Yes sir. I'm not insane. Dr. Hortel can tell you." "I didn't mean anything like that. Well -- " the man laughed nervously. "I don't know what to say. You're still a cub, but you do swell work. Lot of good results, lots of comments from the stations. But, Mr. Poole won't like it." "I know. I know what you mean, Mr. Willmes. But nothing can change my mind. I want to stay this way and that's all there is to it." "But -- you'll get old before you're half through life." Yes, she would. Old, like the Elders, wrinkled and brittle, unable to move right. Old. "It's hard to make you understand. But I don't see why it should make any difference." "Don't go getting me wrong, now. It's not me, but, you know, I don't own Interplan. I just work here. Mr. Poole likes things running smooth and it's my job to carry it out. And soon as everybody finds out, things wouldn't run smooth. There'll be a big stink. The dames will start asking questions and talk." "Will you accept my resignation, then, Mr. Willmes?" "Sure you won't change your mind?" "No sir. I decided that a long time ago. And I'm sorry now that I told Mother or anyone else. No sir, I won't change my mind." "Well, I'm sorry, Mary. You been doing awful swell work. Couple of years you could be centralled on one of the asteroids, the way you been working. But if you should change your mind, there'll always be a job for you here." "Thank you, sir." "No hard feelings?" "No hard feelings." "Okay then. You've got till March. And between you and me, I hope by then you've decided the other way." Mary walked back down the aisle, past the rows of desks. Past the men and women. The handsome, model men and the beautiful, perfect women, perfect, all perfect, all looking alike. Looking exactly alike. She sat down again and took up her ruler and pen. M ary stepped into the elevator and descended several hundred feet. At the Second Level she pressed a button and the elevator stopped. The doors opened with another button and the doors to her Unit with still another. Mrs. Cuberle sat on the floor by the T-V, disconsolate and red-eyed. Her blond hair had come slightly askew and a few strands hung over her forehead. "You don't need to tell me. No one will hire you." Mary sat beside her mother. "If you only hadn't told Mr. Willmes in the first place -- " "Well, I thought he could beat a little sense into you." The sounds from the T-V grew louder. Mrs. Cuberle changed channels and finally turned it off.  "What did you do today. Mother?" Mary smiled. "Do? What can I do, now? Nobody will even come over! I told you what would happen." "Mother!" "They say you should be in the Circuses." Mary went into another room. Mrs. Cuberle followed. "How are we going to live? Where does the money come from now? Just because you're stubborn on this crazy idea. Crazy crazy crazy! Can I support both of us? They'll be firing me, next!" "Why is this happening?" "Because of you, that's why. Nobody else on this planet has ever refused the Transformation. But you turn it down. You want to be ugly!" Mary put her arms about her mother's shoulders. "I wish I could explain, I've tried so hard to. It isn't that I want to bother anyone, or that Daddy wanted me to. I just don't want the Transformation." Mrs. Cuberle reached into the pockets of her blouse and got a purple pill. She swallowed the pill. When the letter dropped from the chute, Mrs. Cuberle ran to snatch it up. She read it once, silently, then smiled. "Oh, I was afraid they wouldn't answer. But we'll see about this now!" She gave the letter to Mary. Mrs. Zena Cuberle Unit #I D City Dear Madam: In re your letter of Dec # #. We have carefully examined your complaint and consider that it requires stringent measures. Quite frankly. the possibility of such a complaint has never occurred to this Dept, and we therefore cannot make positive directives at the moment. However, due to the unusual qualities of the matter, we have arranged an audience at Centraldome, Eighth Level, Sixteenth Unit, Jan # #, # sharp. Dr. Elph Hortel has been instructed to attend. You will bring the subject in question. Yrs Mary let the paper flutter to the floor. She walked quietly to the elethe elevator stopped, she ran from it, crying, into her room. She thought and remembered and tried to sort out and put together. Daddy had said it, Grandpa had, the books did. Yes, the books did. She read until her eyes burned and her eyes burned until she could read no more. Then Mary went to sleep, softly and without realizing it, for the first time. But the sleep was not peaceful. L adies and gentlemen," said the young-looking, well groomed man, "this problem does not resolve easily. Dr. Hortel here, testifies that Mary Cuberle is definitely not insane. Drs. Monagh, Prinn and Fedders all verify this judgment. Dr. Prinn asserts that the human organism is no longer so constructed as to create and. sustain such an attitude through deliberate falsehood. Further, there is positively nothing in the structure, of Mary Cuberle which might suggest difficulties in Transformation. There is evidence for all these statements. And yet we are faced with this refusal. What, may I ask, is to be done?" Mary looked at a metal table. "We have been in session far too long, holding up far too many other pressing contingencies. The trouble on Mercury, for example. We'll have to straighten that out, somehow." Throughout the rows of beautiful people, the mumbling increased. Mrs. Cuberle sat nervously, tapping her shoe and running a comb through her hair. "Mary Cuberle, you have been given innumerable chances to reconsider, you know." Mary said, "I know. But I don't want to." The beautiful people looked at Mary and laughed. Some shook their heads. The man threw up his hands. "Little girl, can you realize what an issue you have caused? The unrest, the wasted time? Do you fully dhderstand what you have done? Intergalactic questions hang fire while you sit there saying the same thing over and over. Doesn't the happiness of your Mother mean anything to you?" A slender, supple woman in a back row cried, "We want action. Do something!" The man in the high stool raised his hand. "None of that, now. We must conform, even though the question is out of the ordinary." He leafed through a number of papers on his desk, leaned down and whispered into the ear of a strong blond man. Then he turned to Mary again. "Child, for the last time. Do you reconsider? Will you accept the Transformation?" "No." The man shrugged his shoulders. "Very well, then. I have here a petition, signed by two thousand individuals and representing all the Stations of Earth. They have been made aware of all the facts and have submitted the petition voluntarily. It's all so unusual and I'd hoped we wouldn't have to -- but the petition urges drastic measures." The mumbling rose. "The petition urges that you shall, upon final refusal, be forced by law to accept the Transformation. And that an act of legislature shall make this universal and binding in the future." Mary's eyes were open, wide. She stood and paused before speaking. "Why?" she asked, loudly. The man passed a hand through his hair. Another voice from the crowd, "Seems to be a lot of questions unanswered here." And another, "Sign the petition, Senator!" , All the voices, "Sign it, sign it!" "But why?" Mary began to cry. The voices stilled for a moment. "Because -- Because -- " "If you'd only tell me that. Tell me!" "Why, it simply isn't being done, that's all. The greatest gift of all. and what if others should get the same idea? What would happen to us then, little girl? We'd be right back to the ugly, thin, fat, unhealthy-looking race we were ages ago! There can't be any exceptions." "Maybe they didn't consider themselves so ugly." The mumbling began anew. "That isn't the point," cried the man. "You must conform!" And the voices cried "Yes" loudly until the man took up a pen and signed the papers on his desk. Cheers, applause, shouts. Mrs. Cuberle patted Mary on the top of her head. "There, now!" she said, happily, "Everything will be all right now. You'U see, Mary." T he Transformation Parlor covered the entire Level, sprawling with its departments. It was always filled and there was nothing to sign and no money to pay and people were always waiting in line. But today the people stood aside. And there were still more, looking in through doors, TV cameras placed throughout the tape machines in every comer. It was filled, but not bustling as usual. Mary walked past the people. Mother and the men in back of her, following. She looked at the people. The people were beautiful, perfect, without a single flaw. All the beautiful people. All the ugly people, staring out from bodies that were not theirs. Walking on legs that had been made for them, laughing with manufactured voices, gesturing with shaped and fashioned arms. Mary walked slowly, despite the prodding. In her eyes, in her eyes, was a mounting confusion; a wide, wide wonderment. The reason was becoming less vague; the fuzzed edges were falling away now. Through all the horrible months and all the horrible moments, the edges fell away. Now it was almost clear. She looked down at her own body, then at the walls which reflected it. Flesh of her flesh, bone of her bone, all hers, made by no one, built by herself or someone she did not know. Uneven kneecaps, making two grinning cherubs when they bent, and the old familiar rubbing together of fat inner thighs. Fat, unshapely, unsystematic Mary. But Mary. Of course. Of course! This was what Daddy meant, what Grandpa and the books meant. What they would know if they would read the books or "hear the words, the good, reasonable words, the words that signified more, much more, than any of this. The understanding heaped up with each step. "Where are these people?" Mary asked half to herself. "What has happened to them and don't they miss themselves, these manufactured things?" She stopped, suddenly. "Yes! That is the reason. They have all forgotten themselves!" A curvacious woman stepped forward and took Mary's hand. The woman's skin was tinted dark. Chipped and sculptured bone into slender rhythmic lines, electrically created carriage, stance, made, turned out. "All right, young lady. We will begin." They guided Mary to a large, curved leather seat. From the top of a long silver pole a machine lowered itself. Tiny bulbs glowed to life and cells began to click. The people stared. Slowly a picture formed upon the screen in the machine. Bulbs directed at Mary, then redirected into the machine. Wheels turning, buttons ticking. The picture was completed. "Would you like to see it?" Mary closed her eyes, tight. "It's really very nice." The woman turned to the crowd. "Oh yes, there's a great deal to be salvaged; you'd be surprised. A great deal. We'll keep the nose and I don't believe the elbows will have to be altered at all.',' Mrs. Cuberle looked at Mary and smiled. "Now, it isn't so bad as you thought, is it?" she said. The beautiful people looked. Cameras turned, tapes wound. "You'll have to excuse us now. Only the machines allowed." Only the machines. The people filed out. Mary saw the rooms in the mirror. Saw things in the rooms, the faces and bodies that had been left; the woman and the machines and the old young men standing about, adjusting, readying. Then she looked at the picture in the screen. And screamed. A woman of medium height stared back at her. A woman with a curved body and thin legs; silver hair, pompadoured, cut short; full sensuous lips, small breasts, flat stomach, unblemished skin. A strange, strange woman no one had ever seen before. The nurse began to take Mary's clothes off. "Geoff," the woman said, "come look at this, will you. Not one so bad in years. Amazing that we can keep anything at all." The handsome man put his hands in his pockets. "Pretty bad, all right." "Be still, child, stop making those noises. You know perfectly well nothing is going to hurt." "But -- what will you do with me?" "That was all explained to you." "No, no, with me, me!" "Oh, you mean the castoffs. The usual. I don't know exactly. Somebody takes care of it." "I want me!" Mary cried. "Not that!" She pointed at the screen. H er chair was wheeled into a semi-dark room. She was naked now, and the men lifted her to a table. The surface was like glass, black, filmed. A big machine hung above. Straps. Clamps pulling, stretching limbs apart. The screen with the picture brought in. The men and the woman, more women now. Dr. Hortel in a corner, sitting with his legs crossed, shaking his head. Mary began to cry above the hum of the mechanical things. "Shhh. My gracious, such a racket! Just think about your job waiting for you, and all the friends you'll have and how nice everything will be. No more trouble now." The big machine hurtling downward. "Where will I find me?" Mary screamed, "when it's all over?" A long needle slid into rough flesh and the beautiful people gathered around the table. They turned on the big machine. i F F It was getting so a person couldnt sleep nights anymore. j Would you like to see all hell break loose? Just make a few holes in nothing at all -- push some steel beams through the holes -- and then head for the hills. But first, read what happened to some people who really did it. By L. Major Reynolds T he red headed secretary asked, "Names, please?" "Ted Baker." "Bill Stephens." "To see H. Joshua Blair. We have an appointment." "It's for three-thirty. We called up two weeks ago." The secretary said, "Oh yes. I have you on the list." She checked them off, studied them vaguely, asked, "What was it you wanted to see Mr. Blair about?" , Ted Baker held out the small steel box he was carrying. "About this." "Ah -- what is it?" "It's a box." "I can see that," the red head snapped. "What is it for? What does it do?" "It's for construction work. It makes holes." The girl sighed. It was late in the day and she didn't care much, really. She snapped an intercom button. An inquiring voice rasped at her. She said, "A. Mr. Baker and a Mr. Stephens to see you." Evidently it was all right because she snapped off the button and pointed to a door. "In there." They went in the door and faced a desk large enough to play tennis on. The man behind the desk gave them a cordial snarl. "Well, what have you got on your mind? And don't take all day to tell me." Ted extended the box. "This. We'd like to sell it to you." "What is it? A bomb?" "No sir. It makes holes. It makes holes real quick." Blair scowled at the box. "What the hell do I want of holes?" Bill Stephens came forward with further explanation. "You see, sir, Ted and I are inventors we make, well -- things. We've been working on this invention in our basement and it seems to be a success." "We don't quite know why it's a success," Ted said, "but it is." "We'd like to demonstrate It for you." "Well, go ahead and demonstrate." Ted raised the box and aimed it horizontally at nothing in particular. He pressed a black button. There was an odd whirring noise. He took his hand off the button and lowered the box. "What are you waiting for?" Blair growled, "Nothing. That's it. I've made the hole." "Are you two crazy? What kind of a fool trick -- ?" Ted reached down and took a pencil off the desk. "May I borrow this?" Without waiting for permission, he put the pencil carefully into the place he'd pointed the box. Half the pencil disappeared. He took his hand away. The part of the pencil still in sight didn't come with it. It stayed where it was, lying in thin air, horizontally, with no apparent support. H. Joshua Blair goggled and turned three shades whiter. "Whawha-what the hell!" "And now, if you'll try to move the pencil, the demonstration will be complete." L ike a man in a trance, Blair got up from his desk and grasped the pencil. It wouldn't move. He got red in the face and threw all his weight on it. It would neither pull nor push. It stayed where it was. Finally Blair backed away from the thing. He leaned on his desk and panted. "You see," Ted said, "The hole goes into the fourth dimension. There's no other explanation. And the fourth dimension holds solider than concrete." Old Blair's head was spinning, but business instinct came quickly to his rescue. "What happens," he asked, "if something in the third dimension is in the way?" "It gets out of the way," Bill said. Ted demonstrated. He trained the box on the visible remains of the pencil. It vanished. Blair said, "Well I'll be damned!" "We figure this will save you a lot of money in construction work," Bill said. "You can get along' without riveters. You just have a man put holes in girders with this and push the rivets through. You also make holes for the beam-ends, andyour entire building will be anchored in the fourth dimension." "Do it again," Blair said. Ted made another hole and put another pencil into it. Blair grasped the pencil and applied leverage. The pencil snapped at the point it entered the next dimension but the broken end of the far piece was not to be seen. Blair asked, "You say you two invented this gadget?" "That's right," Bill said. "We've got a workshop in my basement. We invent in the evenings after we come home from work." "What do you work at?" "I read gas meters. He's a clerk in a supermart." "I suppose you want money for this thing." "We'd like to sell it, yes sir." "How much do you want for it?" "Well, we don't know. What's it worth to you?" "Nothing probably. Leave it here a few days. I'll look it over and let you know." "But -- " "And don't call me -- I'll call you." "But -- " "Leave your address and phone number with my secretary." After Ted and Bill left, Blair yelled, "Get me Jake Steadman in the engineering department!" He didn't bother using the intercom, but his secretary heard him anyhow. Ted and Bill went to work on an idea they had for the treatment of leather. You dipped your shoes in a solution and they lasted forever. The thing didn't work too well, however. It was full of bugs. They tried to eliminate the bugs and once in a while they thought of H. Joshua Blair. "Don't you think it's about time he called us?" Ted asked.  "Don't be so impatient. He's a big man. He owns a big company. It takes time." "He's had over a month." "Relax. We'll hear from him." A nother week passed, and another, until one evening Ted came galloping into the workshop with news. "That big new addition to the city hall! They're working orr it! H. Joshua Blair Construction Company. A big sign says so!" "Relax. You'll blow a tube." "Relax hell! He's using our invention to put up the steel girders. Just like we suggested to him. Guys with bofes like ours making holes and putting in rivets!" Bill stopped what he was doing. "He said he'd call us. Maybe he forgot. Maybe we better go see him," They both knocked off work the next day and got to Blair's office at nine o'clock. Thq red headed secretary said, "You'll have to make an appointment." "Appointment hell!" Ted headed for the inner door. Bill followed him. They went into H. Joshua Blair's office to find him in conference with two vice-presidents. Ted said, "Mr. Blair, we came -- " "Who in the devil are you?" "You remember us. Ted Baker and Bill Stephens. We came about our invention." "What invention?" "Our hole maker. You're using it on the city hall addition." Blair glowered. "Where'd )u get the idea it was yours? Have you got any patents to show?" "Well, no. We didn't -- " "I did! Fourteen good solid patents. You two better go peddle your groceries." "Now look, Mr. Blair." Blair raised his voice. "Throw these two bums out!" Three huskies appeared as by magic to do Blair's bidding. As Ted and Bill landed on the sidewalk, one of the vice-presidents said, "Do you think that was smart, H. J.? They might cause trouble." Blair snorted. "They haven't got a prayer. A meter reader and a grocery clerk!" "We could have at least given them a few hundred." "Not on your life. Never give a sucker an even break, Jim. Give them anything at all, we acknowledge their claim. That'd be stupid." "Maybe your right." "Of course I'm right. It's, business. Now about those other bids. By gad! We can run every contractor in town out of competition! They can't touch our prices!" Out on the sidewalk. Bill and Ted sat mournfully looking up at the vast steel skeleton, held together literally by their own genius. Ted said, "We got a raw deal." "Maybe we had it coming. We were pretty stupid." "Anything we can do?" "Doesn't look like it." "Maybe the leather solution will turn out." "Maybe." Bill looked wistfully up at the steel skeleton. "At even a cent a hole, we'd have done all right." "Let's go home and get to Work." In the Mighty and Benevolent Kingdom of Szkazia, a minor reign of terror existed. The King, tired of complaints from his subjects, had just finished dresfing down his Prime Minister. The TPrime Minister was passing the abuse on to his Chief Scientist. "If something isn't done soon, I won't be responsible for your head, my friend. The King is in a rage." The eyes of the Chief Scientist watered -- partly from fear, and partly from nights and days spent in his laboratory beating out his brains on one idea after another. "I'm doing my best, sire -- " "It's not good enough! These steel girders coming out of nowhere! Banging people in the head . -- whacking them in the stomach! Why it isn't safe to walk through the halls of the Administration Building. Even the bedrooms of the Executive Apartments are not safe! The other night the Director of Propaganda had just gone to bed -- " "I know of the incident," the Chief Scientist said hurriedly. "Oh, you do? But you've done nothing about -- " "I've been working hard," the scientist said patiently, "and I think I have the solution. Give me another day." "One day, then. After that -- " The Prime Minister made a significant slicing motion with his finger. T he Prime Minister chewed his fingernails and watched the clock. Sleep was out of the question with the King calling up every little while yelling for action. The Minister counted the hours and presented himself at the Royal Laboratories precisely twenty-four hours later. "Time's up," he siiapped. The Chief Scientist was wiping his fdee. There were new lines around his mouth. He indicated a small steel box. "I think I've got it," he said. "Come with me." They went swiftly to the Administration Building. "This should be close enough. We depress this lever and -- and hope." "Well, do it -- do it!" The Chief Scientist pushed the lever on the steel box. A whirring sound came from within. All the steel girder ends in sight -- all the nasty little rivets -- disappeared. The Chief Scientist smiled and wiped his face again. "It worked," he said. "Excellent. I'll see that you get a medal." "Thank you," the Chief Scientist said sadly. That was the trouble with people nowadays. They either handed you a medal or your head. T ed and Bill stared sadly at the mess around the City Hall. Bill said, "It's a good thing it cob lapsed at night so nobody was killed, isn't it?" "You said it. I'd have felt guilty ifthere'd been any casualties." "What do you suppose went wrong?" "You got me. What do you think they'll do to old Blair?" "I don't know, but it looks pretty bad. They refused to let him out on bail." "Serves him right. The way he treated us." "You've got it wrong. He treated us swell. He did us a big favor. We could have been blamed for this." Bill thought it over before saying, "I guess you're right. I hadn't looked at it that way." "Let's go home and get to work on the leather solution." So they did. Extra Gift Subscriptions Only # By this time you know whether you like IF or not. You also know that don't know is that, if you include a gift subscription along with your own, it costs only #, or both subscriptions for six bucks! Thus, two can enjoy IF cheaper than one! Just fill in below and mail with remittance to IF Magazine, Kingston, New York. AnnRF.;.; . riTY Send Gift Subscription to; Tam's problem was simple. He lived in a world that belonged to someone else. By Alan E. Nourse T hey saw Tam's shabby clothing and the small, weatherbeaten bag he carried, and they ordered him aside from the flow of passengers, and checked his packet of passports and visas with extreme care. Then they ordered him to wait. Tam waited, a chilly apprehension rising in his throat. For fifteen minutes he watched them, helplessly. Finally, the Spaceport was empty, and the huge liner from the outer Asteroid Rings was being lifted and rolled by the giant hooks and cranes back into its berth for drydock and repair, her curved, meteor-dented hull gleaming dully in the harsh arc lights. Tam watched the creaking cranes, and shivered in the cold night air, feeling hunger and dread gnawing at his stomach. There was none of the elation left, none of the great, expansive, soothing joy at returning to Earth after eight long years of hard work and bitterness. Only the cold, corroding uncertainty, the growing apprehension. Times had changed since that night back in '# -- just how much he hardly dared to guess. All he knew was the rumors he had heard, fhe whispered tales, the frightened eyes and the scarred backs and faces. Tam hadn't believed them then, so remote from Earth. He had just laughed and told himself that the stories weren't true. And now they all welled back into his mind, tightening his throat and making him tremble -- "Hey, Sharkie. Come here." Tam turned and walked slowly over to the customs official who held his papers. "Everything's in order," he said, half defiantly, looking up at the officer's impassive face. "There isn't any mistake." "What were you doing in the Rings, Sharkie?" The officer's voice was sharp. "Indenture. Working off my fare back home." The officer peered into Tarn's face, incredulously. "And you come back here?" He shook his head and turned to the other officer. "I knew these Sharkies were dumb, but I didn't think they were that dumb." He turned back to Tam, his eyes suspicious. "What do you think you're going to do now?" Tam shrugged, uneasily. "Get a job," he said. "A man's got to eat." The officers exchanged glances. "How long you been on the Rings?" "Eight years."' Tam looked up at himj anxiously. "Can I have my papers now?" A cruel grin played over the officer's lips. "Sure," he said, handing back the packet of papers. "Happy job-hunting," he added sardonically, "But remember -- the ship's going back to the Rihgs in a week. You can always sign yourself over for fare -- " "I know," said Tam, turning away sharply. "I know all about how that works." He tucked the papers carefully into a tattered breast pocket, hefted the bag wearily, and began trudging slowly across the cold concrete of the Port toward the street and the Underground. A wave of loneliness, almost overpowering in intensity, swept over him, a feeling of emptiness, bleak and hopeless. A chilly night wind swept through his unkempt blond hair as the automatics let him out into the street, and he saw the large dirty "New Denver Underground" sign with the arrow at the far side of the road. Off to the right, several miles across the high mountain plateau, the great Capitol city loomed up, shining like a thousand twinkling stars in the clear cold air. Tam jingled his last few coins listlessly, and started for the downward ramp. Somewhere, down there, he could find a darkened corner, maybe even a bench, where the police wouldn't bother him for a couple of hours.' Maybe after a little sleep, he'd find some courage, hidden away somewhere. Just enough to walk into an office and ask for a job. That, he reflected wearily as he shuffled into the tunnel, would take a lot of courage -- T he girl at the desk glanced up at him, indifferent, and turned her eyes back to the letter she was typing. Tam Peters continued to stand, awkwardly, his blond hair rumpled, little crow's-feet of weariness creeping from the corners of his eyes. Slowly he looked around the neat office, feeling a pang of shame at his shabby clothes. He should at least have found some way to shave, he thought, some way to take some of the rumple from his trouser legs. He looked back at the receptionist, and coughed, lightly. she finished her letter at a leisurely pace, and finally looked up at him, her eyes cold. "Well?" "I read your ad. I'm looking for a job. I'd like to speak to Mr. Randall." The girl's eyes narrowed, and she took him in in a rapid, sweeping glance, his high, pale forehead, the shock of mud-blond hair, the thin, sensitive face with the exaggerated lines of approaching middle age. the slightly misty blue eyes. It seemed to Tam that she stared for a full minute, and he shifted uneasily, trying to meet the cold inspection, and failing, finally settling his eyes on her prim, neatly manicured fingers. Her lip curled very slightly. "Mr. Randall can't see you today. He's busy. Try again tomorrow." She turned back to typing. A flat wave of defeat sprang Up in his chest. "The ad said to apply today. The earlier the better." She sniffed indifferently, and pulled a long white sheet from the desk. "Have you filled out an application?" "No." "You can't see Mr. Randall She pointed to a small table across the room, and he felt her eyes on his back as he shuffled over and sat down. tion with great care, making the printing as neat as he could with the old-style vacuum pen provided. Name, age, sex, race, nationality, planet where born, pre-Revolt experience, post-Revolt experience, preference -- try as he would, Tara couldn't keep the ancient pen from leaking, making an unsightly blot near the center of the form. Finally he finished, and handed the paper back to the girl at the desk. Then he sat back and waited. Another man came in, filled out a form, and waited, too, shooting Tam a black look across the room. In a few moments the girl turned to the man. "Robert Stover?" "Yuh," said the man, lumbering to his feet. "That's me." "Mr. Randall will see you now." The man walked heavily across the room, disappeared into the back office. Tam eyed the clock uneasily, still waiting. A garish picture on the wall caught his eyes, a large, very poor oil portrait of a very stout, graying man dressed in a ridiculous green suit with a little white turban-like affair on the top of his head. Underneath was a little brass plaque with words Tam could barely make out: Abraham L. Ferrel (##-#) Founder and First President Marsport Mines, Incorporated "Unto such men as these, we look to leadership." Tam stared at the picture, his lip curling slightly. He glanced anxiously at the clock as another man was admitted to the small back office. Then another man. Anger began creeping into Tam's face, and he fought to keep the scowl away, to keep from showing his concern. The hands of the clock crept around, then around again. It was almost noon. Not a very new dodge, Tam thought coldly. Not very new at all. Finally the small cold flame of anger got the better of him, and he rose and walked over to the desk. "I'm still here," he said patiently. "I'd like to see Mr. Randall." The girl stared at him indignantly, and flipped an intercom switch. "That Peters application is still out here," she said brittlely. "Do you want to see him, or not?" There was a moment of silence. Then the voice on the intercom grated, "Yes,I guess so. Send him in." The office was smaller, immaculately neat. Two visiphone units hung on a switchboard at the man's elbow. Tam's eyes caught the familiar equipment, recognized the interplanetary power coils on one. Then he turned his eyes to the man behind the desk. "Now, then, what are you after?" asked the man, settling his bulk down behind the desk, his eyes guarded, revealing a trace of boredom. T am was suddenly bitterly ashamed of his shabby appearance, the two-day stubble on his chin. He felt a dampness on his forehead, and tried to muster some of the old power and determination into his voice. "I need a job," he said. "I've had plenty of experience with radio-electronics and remote control power operations. I'd make a good mine-operator -- " "I can read," the man cut in sharply, gesturing toward the application form with the ink blot in the middle. "I read all about your experience. But I can't use you. There aren't any more openings." Tam's ears went red. "But you're always advertising," he countered. "You don't have to worry about me working on Mars, either -- I've worked on Mars before, and I can work six, seven hohrs, even, without a mask or equipment -- " The man's eyebrows raised slightly. "How very interesting," he said flatly. "The fact remains that there aren't any jobs open for you." The cold, angry flame flared up in Tam's throat suddenly, forcing out the sense of futility and defeat. "Those other men," he said sharply. "I was here before them. That girl wouldn't let me in -- " Randall's eyes narrowed amusedly. "What a pity," he said sadly. "And just think, I hired every one of them -- His face suddenly hardened, and he sat forward, his eyes glinting coldly. "Get smart, Peters. I think Marsport Mines can somehow rhanage without you. You or any other Sharkie. The men just don't like to work with Sharkies." Rage swelled up in Tam's chest, bitter futile rage, beating at his temples and driving away all thought of caution. "Look," he grated, bending over the desk threateningly. "I know the law of this system. There's a fair-employment act on the books. It says that men are to be hired by any company in order of application when they qualify equally in experience. I can, prove my experience -- " Randall stood up, his face twisted contemptuously. "Get out of here," he snarled. "You've got nerve, you have, come crawling in here with your law! Where do you think you are?" His voice grated in the still air of the office. "We don't hire Sharkies, law or no law, get that? Now get out of here!" Tam tumbd, his ears burning, and strode through the office, blindly, kicking open the door and almost running to the quiet air of the street outside. The girl at the desk yawned, and snickered, and went back to her typing with an unpleasant grin. Tam walked the street, block after block, seething, futile rage swelling up and bubbling over, curses rising to his lips, clipped off with some last vestige of self-control. At last he turned into a small downtown bar and sank wearily onto a stool near the door. The anger was wearing down now to a sort of empty, hopeless weariness, dulling his senses, exaggerating the hunger in his stomach. He had expected it, he told himself, he had known what the answer would be -- but he knew that he had hoped, against hope, against what he had known to be the facts; hoped desperately that maybe someone would listen. Oh, he knew the laws, all right, but he'd had plenty of time to see the courts in action. Unfair employment was almost impossible to make stick under any circumstances, but with the courts rigged the way they were these days -- he sighed, and drew out one of his last credit-coins. "Beer," he muttered as the barkeep looked up. The bartender scowled, his heavy-set face a picture of fashionable distaste. Carefully he filled every other order at the bar. Then he grudgingly set up a small beer, mostly foam, and flung some smallcoin change down on the bar before Tam. Tam stared at the' glass, the little proud flame of anger flaring slowly. A fat man, sitting nearby, stared at him for a long moment, then took a long sw'ill of beer from his glass. " 'Smatter, Sharkie? Whyncha drink y'r beer 'n get t' hell out o' here?" Tam stared fixedly at his glass, . giving no indication of having heard a word. The fat man stiffened a trifle, swung around to face him. "Goddam Sharkie' s too good to talk to a guy," he snarled loudly. "Whassamatter, Sharkie, ya deaf?" Tam's hand trembled as , he reached for the beer, took a short swallow. Shrugging, he set the glass on the bar and got up from his stool. He walked out, feeling many eyes on his back. He walked. Time became a blur to a mind beaten down by constant rebuff. He became conscious of great weariness of both mind and body. Instinct screamed for rest... T am sat up, shaking his head to clear it. He shivered from the chill of the park -- the cruel pressure of the bench. He pulled up his collar and moved out into the street again. There was one last chance. Cautiously his mind skirted the idea, picked it up, regarded it warily, then threw it down again. He had promised him.self never to consider it, years before, in the hot, angry days of the Revolt. Even then he had had some inkling of the shape of things, and he had promised himself, bitterly, never to consider that last possibility. Still -- Another night in the cold out-ofdoors could kill him. Suddenly he didn't care any more, didn't care about promises, or pride, or anything else. He turned into a public telephone booth, checked an address in the thick New Denver book -- He knew he looked frightful as he stepped onto the elevator, felt the cold eyes turn away from him in distaste. Once he might have been mortified, felt the deep shame creeping up his face, but he didn't care any longer. He just stared ahead at the moving panel, avoiding the cold eyes, until the fifth floor was called. The office was halfway down the dark hallway. He saw the sign on the door, dimly: "United Continents Bureau of Employment", and down in small letters below, "Planetary Division, David G. Hawke." Tam felt the sinking feeling in his stomach, and opened the door apprehensively. It had been years since he had seen Dave, long years filled with violence and cljange. Those years could change men, too. Tam thought, fearfully; they could make even the greatest men change. He remembered, briefly, his promise to himself, made just after the Revolt, never to trade on past friendships, never to ask favors of those men he had known before, and befriended. With a wave of warmth, the memory of those old days broke through, those days when he had roomed with Dave Hawke, the long, probing talks, the confidences, the deep, richknowledge that they had shared each others dreams and ideals, that they had stood side by side for a common cause, though they were such different men, from such very different worlds. Ideals had been cheap in those days, talk easy, but still, Tam knew that Dave had been sincere, a firm, stout friend. He had known, then, the sincerity in the big lad's quiet voice, felt the rebellious fire in his eyes. They had understood each other, then, deeply, sympathetically, in spite of the powerful barrier they sought to tear down -- The girl at the desk caught his eye, looked up from her work without smiling. "Yes?" "My name is Tam Peters. I'd like to see Mr. Hawke." His voice was thin, reluctant, reflecting overtones of the icy chill in his chest. So much had happened since those long-dead days, so many things to make men change -- The girl was grinning, her face like a harsh mask. "You're wasting your time," she said, her voice brittle. Anger flooded Tam's face. "Listen," he hissed. "I didn't ask for your advice. I asked to see Dave Hawke. If you choose to announce me now, that's fine. If you don't see fit, then I'll go in without it. And you won't stop me -- " The girl stiffened, her eyes angry. "You'd better not get smart," she snapped, watching him warily. "There are police in the building. You'd better not try anything, or I'll call them!" "That's enough Miss Jackson." The girl turned to the man in the office door, her eyes disdainful. The man stood in the doorway, a giant, with curly black hair, above a high, intelligent forehead, dark brooding eyes gleaming like live coals in the sensitive face. Tam looked at him, and suddenly his knees would hardly support him, and his voice was a tight whisper -- "Dave!" And then the huge man was gripping his hand, a strong arm around his thin shoulders, the dark, brooding eyes soft and smiling. "Tam, Tam -- It's been so damned long, man' -- oh, it's good to see you, Tam. Why, the last I heard, you'd taken passage to the Rings -- years ago -- " Weakly, Tam stumbled into the inner office, sank into a chair, his eyes overflowing, his mind a turmoil of joy and relief. The huge man slammed the door to the outer office and settled down behind the desk, sticking his feet over the edge, beaming. "Where have you been, Tam? You promised you'd look me up any time you came to New Den'Per, and I haven't seen you in a dozen years -- " He fished in a lower drawer. "Drink?" "No, no -- thanks. I don't think I could handle a drink -- " Tam sat back, gazing at the huge man, his throat tight. "You look bigger and better than ever, Dave." D ave Hawke laughed, a deep bass laugh that seemed to start at the soles of his feet. "Couldn't very well look thin and wan," he said. He pushed a cigar box across the desk. "Here, light up. I'm on these exclusively these days -- remember how you tried to get me to smoke them, back at the University? How you couldn't stand cigarettes? Said they were for women, a man should smoke a gooji cigar. You finally converted me." Tam grinned, suddenly feeling the warmth of the old friendship swelling back. "Yes, I remember. You were smoking that rotten corncob, then, because old Prof Tenley smoked one that you could smell in the back of the room, and in those days the Prof could do no wrong -- " Dave Hawke grinned broadly, settled back in his chair as he lit the cigar. "Yes, I remember. Still got that corncob around somewhere -- " he shook his head, his eyes dreamy. "Good old Prof Teiian honest man, Tam. They don't have them like that in the colleges these days. Wonder what happened to the old goat?" "He was killed," said Tam, softly. "Just dfter the war. Got caught in a Revolt riot, and he was shot down." Dave looked at him, his eyes suddenly sad. "A lot of honest men went down in those riots, didn't they? That was the worst part of the Revolt. There wasn't any provision made for the honest men, the really good men." He stopped, and regarded Tam closely. "What's the trouble, Tam? If you'd been going to make a friendly call, you'd have done it years ago. You know this office has always been open to you -- " Tam stared at his shoe, carefully choosing his words, lining them up in his mindi a frown creasing his forehead. "I'll lay it on the line," he said in a low voice. "I'm in a spot. That passage to the Rings wasn't voluntary. I was shanghaied onto a freighter, and had to work for eight years without pay to get passage back. I'm broke, and I'm hungry, and I need to see a doctor -- " "Well, hell!" the big man exploded. "Why didn't you holler sooner? Look, Tam -- we've been friends for a long time. You know better than to hesitate." He fished for his wallet. "Here, I can let you hav as much as you need -- couple hundred?" "No, no -- That's not what I'm getting at." Tam felt his face flush with embarrassment. "I need a job, Dave. I need one bad." Dave sat back, and his feet came off the desk abruptly. He didn't look at Tam. "I see," he said softly. "A job -- " He stared at the ceiling for a moment. "Tell you what," he said. "The government's opening a new uranium mine in a month or so -- going to be a big project, they'll need lots of men -- on Mercury -- " Tam's eyes fell, a lump growing in his throat. "Mercury," he repeated dully. "Why, sure, Tam -- good pay, chance for promotion." "I'd be dead in six months on Mercury." Tam's eyes met Dave's, trying to conceal the pain. "You know that as well as I do, Dave -- " Dave looked away. "Oh, the docs don't know what they're talking about -- " "You know perfectly well that they do. I couldn't even stand Venus very long. I need a job on Mars, Dave -- or on Earth." "Yes," said Dave Hawke sadly, "I guess you're right." He looked straight at Tam, his eyes sorrowful. "The truth is, I can't help you. I'd like to, but I can't. There's nothing I can do." Tam stared, the pain of disillusionment sweeping through him. "Nothing you can do!" he exploded. "But you're the director of this bureau! You know every job, open on every one of the planets -- " "I know. And I have to help get them filled. But I can't make anyone hire, Tam. I can send applicants, and recommendations, until I'm blue in the face, but I can't make a company hire -- " He paused, staring at Tam. "Oh, hell," he snarled, suddenly, his face darkening. "Let's face it, Tam. They won't hire you. Nobody will hire you. You're a Sharkie, and that's all there is to it, they aren't hiring Sharkies. And there's nothing I can do to make them." Tam sat as if he had been struck, the color draining from his face. "But the law -- Dave, you know there's a law. They have to hire us, if we apply first, and have the necessary qualifications.'? The big man shrugged, uneasily. "Sure, there's a law, but who's going to enforce it?" Tam looked at him, a desperate tightness in his throat. "You could enforce it. You could if you wanted T he big man stared at him for a moment, then dropped his eyes, looked down at the desk. Somehow this big body seemed smaller, less impressive. "I can't do it, Tam. I just can't." "They'd have to listen to you!" Tam's face was eager. "You've got enough power to put it acros.s -- the court would have to stick to the law -- " "I can't do it." Dave drew nervously on his cigar, and the light in his eyes seemed duller, now. "If it were just me, I wouldn't hesitate a minute.' But I've got a wife, a family. I can't jeopardize them -- " "Dave, you know it would be the right thing." "Oh, the right thing be damned ! I can't go out on a limb, I tell you. There's nothing I can do. I can let you have money, Tam, as much as you need -- I could help you set up in business, maybe, or anything --  but I can't stick my neck out like that." Tam sat stiffly, coldness seeping down into his legs. Deep in his heart he had known that this was what he had dreaded, not the fear of rebuff, not the fear of being snubbed, unrecognized, turned out. That would have been nothing, compared to this change in the honest, forthright, fearless Dave Hawke he had once known. "What's happened, Dave? Back in the old days you would have leaped at such a chance. I would have- -- the shoe was on the other foot then. We talked, Dave, don't you remember how we talked? We were friends, you can't forget that. I know you, I know what you believe, what you think. How can you let yourself down?" Dave Hawke's eyes avoided Tam's. "Times have changed. Those were the good old days, hack when everybody was happy, almost. Everybody but me and a few others -- at least, it looked that way tT you. But those days are gone. They'll never come back. This is a reaction period, and the reaction is bitter. There isn't any place for fighters now, the world is just the way people want it, and nobody can change it. What do you expect me to do?" He stopped, his heavy face contorted, a line of perspiration on his forehead. "I hate it," he said finally, "but my hands are tied. I can't do anything. That's the way things are -- " "But why?" Tam Peters was standing, eyes blazing, staring down at the big man behind the desk, the bitterness of long, weary years tearing into his voice, almost blinding him. "Why is that the way things are? What have I done? W'hy do we have this mess, where a man isn't worth any more than the color of his skin -- " Dave Hawke slammed his fist on the desk, and his voice roared out in the close air of the office. "Because it was coming!" he bellowed. "It's been coming and now it's here -- and there's nothing on God's earth can be done about it!" Tam's jaw sagged, and he stared at the man behind the desk. "Dave -- think what you're saying, Dave -- " "I know right well what I'm saying," Dave Hawke roared, his eyes burning bitterly. "Oh, you have no idea how long I've thought, the fight I've had with myself, the sacrifices I've had to make. You weren't born like I was, you weren't raised on the wrong side of the fence -- well, there was an old, old Christmas story that I used to read. Years ago, before they burned the Sharkie books. It was about an evil man who went through life cheating people, hating and hurting people, and when he died, he found that every evil deed he had ever done had become a link in a heavy iron chain, tied and shackled to his waist. And he wore that chain he had built up, and he had to drag it, and drag it, from one eternity to the next -- his name was Marley, remember?" "Dave, you're not making sense -- " "Oh, yes, all kinds of sensa. Because you Sharkies have a chain. too. You started forging it around your ankles back in the classical Middle Ages of Earth. Year by year you built it up, link by link, built it stronger, heavier. You could have stopped it any time you chose, but you didn't ever think of that. You spread over the world, building up your chain, assuming that things would always be just the way they were, just the way you wanted them to be." The big man stopped, breathing heavily, a sudden sadness creeping into his eyes, his voice taking on a softer tone. "You were such fools," he said softly. "You waxed and grew strong, and clever, and confident, and the more power you had, the more you wanted. You fought wars, and then bigger and better wars, until you couldn't be any longer. And finally you divided your world into two armed camps, and brought Fury out of her box, fought with the power of the atoms theihselves, you clever Sharkies -- and when the dust settled, and cooled off, there weren't very many of you left. Lots of us -- it was your war, remember -- but not very many of you. Of course there was a Revolt then, and all the boxed up, driven in hatred and bloodshed boiled up and over, and you Sharkies at long last got your chain tied right around your waists. You were a long, long time building it, and now you can wear it -- " T AM'S face was chalky. "Dave -- there were some of us -- you know there were many of us that hated it as much as you did, before the Revolt. Some of us fought, some I of us at least tried -- " The big man nodded his head, bitterly. "You thought you tried, sure. It was the noble thing to do, the romantic thing, the good thing to do. But you didn't really believe it. I know -- I thought there was some hope, back then, some chance to straighten things out without a Revolt. For a long time I thought that you, and those like you, really meant all you were saying, I thought somehow we could find an equal footing, an end to the hatred and bitterness. But there wasn't any end, and you never really thought there ever would be. That made it so safe -- it would never succeed, so when things were quiet it was a nice idea to toy around with, this equality for all, a noble project that couldn't possibly succeed. But when things got hot, it was a different matter." He stared at Tam, his dark eyes brooding. "Oh, it wasn't just you, Tam. You were my best friend, even though it was a hopeless, futile friendship. You tried, you did the best you could, I know. But it just wasn't true, Tam. When it came to the pinch, to a real jam, you would have been just like the rest, basically. It was built up in you, drummed into you, until no amount of fighting could ever scour it out -- " Dave Hawke stood up, walked  over to the window, staring out j across the great city. Tam watched # him, the blood roaring in his ears,  hardly able to believe what he had heard from the big man, fighting , to keep his mind from sinking into i total confusion. Somewhere a voice I deep within him seemed to be strug' gling through with confirmation, telling him that Dave Ha,wke was right, that he never really had believed. Suddenly Dave turned to him, his dark eyes intense. "Look, Tam," he said, quickly, urgently. "There are jobs you can get. Go to Mercury for a while, work the mines -- not long, just for a while, out there in the sun -- then you can come back -- " Tam's ears burned, fierce anger suddenly bursting in his mind, a feeling of loathing. "Never," he snapped. "I know what you mean. I don't do things that way. That's a coward's way, and by God, I'm no coward!" "But it would be so easy, Tam -- " Dave's eyes were pleading now. "Please -- " Tam's eyes glinted. "No dice. I've got a better idea. There's one thing I can do. It's not very nice, but at least it's honest, and square. I'm hungry. There's one place where I can get food. Even Sharkies get food there. And a bed to sleep in, and books to read -- maybe even some Sharkie books, and maybe some paper to wjte on -- " He stared at the big man, oddly, his pale eyes feverish. "Yes, yes, there's one place I can go, and get plenty to eat, and get away from this eternal rottenness -- Dave looked up at him, his eyes suspicious. "Where do you mean?" "Prison," said Tam Peters. "Oh, now see here -- let's not be ridiculous -- " "Not so ridiculous," snapped Tam, his eyes brighter. "I figured it all out, before I came up here. I knew what you were going to say. Sure, go to Mercury, Tam, work in the mines a while -- well, I can't do it that way. And there's only one other answer." "But, Tam -- " "Oh, it wouldn't take much. You know how the courts handle Sharkies. Just a small offense, to get me a few years, then a couple of attempts to break out, and I'd be in for life. I'm a Sharkie, remember. People don't waste time with us." "Tam, you're talking nonsense. Good Lord, man, you'd have no freedom, no life -- " "What freedom do I have now?" Tam snarled, his voice growing wild. "Freedom to starve? Freedom to crawl on my hands and knees for a little bit of food? I don't want that kind of freedom." His eyes grew shrewd, shifted slyly to Dave Hawke's broad face. "Just a simple charge," he said slowly. "Like assault, for instance. Criminal assault -- it has an ugly sound, doesn't it, Dave? That should give me ten years -- " his fist clenched at his side. "Yes, criminal assault is just what ought to do the trick -- " The big man tried to dodge, but Tam was too quick. His fist caught Dave in the chest, and Tam was on him like a fury, kicking, scratching, snarling, pounding. Dave choked and cried out, "Tam, for God's sake stop -- " A blow caught him in the mouth, choking off his words as Tam fought, all the hate and bitterness of long weary years translated into scratching, swearing desperation. Dave pushed him off, like a bear trying to disentangle a maddened dog from his fur, but Tam was back at him, fighting harder. The door opened, and Miss ( Continued on page #) T hey wanted to go home -- back to the planet they'd known. But even the stars had changed. Did the fate of all creation hinge upon an -- AN By Mari Wolf of the photographic plates out of the developer and laid them on the table beside the others. Then he picked up the old star charts -- Volume #, Number I -- maps of space from various planetary systems within a hundred light years of SolHe looked around the observation room at the others. "We might as well start checking." The men and women around the table nodded. None of them said anything. Even the muffled conversation from the corridor beyond the observation room ceased as the people stopped to listen. McCann set the charts down and opened them at the first sheet -- the composite map of the stars as seen from Earth. "Don't be too disappointed if we're wrong," he said. Amos Carhill's fists clenched. He leaned across the table. "You still don't believe we're near Sol, do you? You're getting senile, Hugh! You know the mathematics of our position as well as anybody." "I know the math," Hugh said quietly. "But remember, a lot of our basics have already proved themselves false this trip. We can't be sure of anything. Besides, I think # . I'd remember this planet we're on if we'd ever been here before. We visited every planetary system within a hundred light years of Sol the first year." Carhill laughed. "What's there to remember about this hunk of rock? Tiny, airless, mountainless -- the most monotonous piece of matter we've landed on in years." Hugh shrugged and turned to the next chart. The others clustered around him, checking, comparing the chart with the photographic plates of their position, finding nothing familiar in the star pattern. "I still think we would have remembered this planet," Hugh said. "Just because it is so monotonous. After all, what have' we been looking for, all these years? Life. Other worlds with living forms, other types of evolution, types adapted to different environments. This particular planet is less capable of supporting life than our own Moon." Martha Carhill looked up from the charts. Her face was as tense and strained as her husband's, and the lines about her mouth deeply etched. "We've got to be near Earth. We've just got to. We've got to find people again." Her voice broke. "We've been looking for so long -- " Hugh McCann sighed. The worry that had been growing in him ever since they first left the rim of the galaxy and turned homeward deepened into a nagging fear. He didn't know why he was afraid. He too hoped that they were near Earth. He almost believed that they would soon be home. But the others, their reactions -- He shook his head. They no longer merely hoped. With them, especially with the older, ones, it was faith, a blind, unreasoning, fanatic faith that their journey was almost over and they would be on Earth again and pick up the lives they had Ifeft behind fifty-three years before. "Look," Amos Carhill said. "Here are our reference points. Here's Andromeda Galaxy, and the dark nebula, and the arch of our own Milky Way." He pointed to the places he had named on the plates. "Now we can check some of these high magnitude reference stars with the charts." Hugh let him take the charts and go through them, checking, rejecting. Carhill was probably right. He'd find Sol soon enough. It had been too long for one shipful of people to follow a quest, especially a hopeless one. For fiftythree years they had scouted the .galaxy, looking for other worlds with life forms. A check on diverging evolutions, they had called it -- uncounted thousands of suns without planets, bypassed. Thousands of planetary systems, explored, or merely looked at and rejected. Heavy, cold worlds with methane atmospheres and lifeless rocks without atmospheres and even earthsized, earth-type planets, with oceans and oxygen and warmth. But no life. No life anywhere. That was one of the basics they had lost, years ago -- their belief that life would arise on any planet capable of supporting it. "We could take a spectrographic analysis of some of those high magnitude stars," Carhill said. Then abruptly he straightened, eyes alight, his hand on the last chart. "We don't need it after all. Look! There's Sirius, and here it is on the plates. That means Alpha Centauri must be -- " He paused. He frowned and ran his hand over the plate to where the first magnitude star was photographed. "It must be Alpha Centauri, It has to be!" "Except that it's over five degrees out of position." Hugh looked at the plate, and then at the chart, and then back at the plate again. And then he knew what it was that he had feared subconsciously all along. "You're right, Amos." he said slowly. "There's Alpha Centauri -- about twenty light years away. And there's Sirius, and Arcturus and Betelgeuse and all the others." He pointed them out, one by one, in their unfamiliar locations on the plates. "But they're all out of position, in reference to each other." H e stopped. The others stared back at him, not saying anything. Little by little the faith began to drain out of their eyes. "What does it mean?" Martha Carhill's voice was only a whisper. "It means that we discarded one basic too many," Hugh McCann said. "Relativity. The theory that our subjective time, here on the ship, would differ from objective time outside." "No," Amos Carhill said slowly. "No, it's a mistake. That's all. We haven't gone into the future. We  can't have. It isn't possible that more time has elapsed outside the ship than -- " "Why not?" Hugh said softly. exceeded the speed of light, many times." "Which disproves that space-time theory in itself!" Carhill shouted. "Does it?" Hugh said. "Or does it just mean we never really understood space-time at all?" He didn't wait for them to answer. He pointed that lay beyond Alpha Centauri on the plates. "That's probably Sol. If it is, we can find out the truth soon enough." He looked at their faces and wondered what their reactions would be, if the truth was what he feared. The ship throbbed softly, pulsating in the typical vibrations of low speed drive. In the forward viewscreens the star grew larger. The people didn't looL at it very often. They moved about the corridors of the ship, much as they usually moved, but quietly. They seemed to be trying to ignore the star. "You can't be sure, Hugh." Nora McCann laid her hand on her husband's arm. "No, of course I can't be sure." The door from their quarters into the corridor was open. Several more people came in -- young people who had been bom on the ship. They were talking and laughing. "Would it be so hard on the young ones, Hugh? They've never seen the Earth. They're used to finding nothing but lifeless worlds everywhere." One of the young boys in the hall looked up at the corridor viewscreen and pointed at the star and then shrugged. The others turned away, not saying anything, and after a minute they left and the boy followed them. "There's your answer," Hugh McCann said dully. "Earth's a symbol to them. It's home. It's the place us. Sometimes I think it's the only thing that has kept us sane all these years -- the knowledge that there is a world full of people, somewhere, that we're not alone." Her hand found his and he CTipped it, almost absently, and then he looked up at their own small viewscreen. The star was much bigger now. It was already a definite circle of yellow light. A yellow G-type sun, like a thousand others they had appiroached and orbited around and left behind them. A yellow sun that could have been anywhere in the galaxy. "Hugh," she said after a moment, "do you really believe that thousands of years have gone by, outside?" "I don't know what to believe. I only know what the plates show." "That may not even be Sol, up ahead," she said doubtfully. "We niay be in some other part of space altogether, and that's why the charts are different." "Perhaps. But either way we're lost. Lost in space or in time or in both. What does it matter?" "If we're just lost in space it's not so -- ;So irrevocable. We could still find our way back to Earth, maybe." He didn't answer. He looked up at the screen and the circle of light and his lips tightened. Whatever the truth was, they didn't have long to wait. They'd be within gravitational range in less than an hour. He wondered why he was reacting so differently from the others. He was just as afraid as they were. He knew that. But he wasn't fighting the thought that perhaps they had really traveled out of their own time. He wondered what it was that made him different from the other old ones, the ones like Carhill who refused even to face the possibility, who insisted on clinging to their illusions in the face of the photographic evidence. H e didn't think that he was a pessimist. And yet, after only three years of their trip, after only fifty Earthlike but lifeless worlds, he had been the first to consider the possibility that life was unique to Earth and that their old theories concerning its spontaneous emergence from a favorable environment might be wrong. Only Nora had agreed with him then. Only Nora could face this possibility with him now. The two of them were very much alike in their outlooks. They were both pragmatists. But this time there would be no long years during which the others could slowly shift their opinions, slowly relinquish their old beliefs and turn to new ones. The yellow sun was too large and urgent in the screen. "Hugh!" He turned to the door and saw Arnos Carhill standing there, bracing himself against the corridor wall. There was no color at all in Carhill's face. "Come on up to the control room with me, Hugh. We're going to start decelerating any minute now." Hugh frowned. He would prefer to stay and watch their approach on the screen, with Nora at his side. He had no duties in the controlroom. He was too old to have any part in the actual handling of the ship. Amos was old, too. But they would be there, all the old ones, looking through the high powered screens for the first clear glimpse of the third planet from the sun. "All right, Amos." Hugh got up and started for the door. "I'll wait here for you, Hugh," Nora said. He smiled at her and then followed Carhill out into the crowded corridor. No one spoke to them. Most of the people they passed were neither talking, nor paying any attention to anything except the corridor screens, which they could no longer ignore. The few who were talking spoke about Earth and how wonderful it would be to get home again. "You're wrong, Hugh," Amos said suddenly. "I hope I am." The crowd thinned out as they passed into the forward bulkheads. The only men they saw now were the few young ones on duty. Except for their set, anxious faces they might have been handling any routine landing in any routine system. The ship quivered for just a second as it shifted over into deceleration. There was an instant of vertigo and then it was gone and the ship's gravity felt as normal as ever. Hugh didn't even break stride at the shift. He followed Carhill to the control room doorway and pushed his way in, taking a place among the others who already clustered about the great forward screen. The pilot ignored them and worked his controls. The screen cleared as the ship's deceleration . increased. The pilot didn't look at it. He was a young man. He had never seen the Earth. "Look!" Amos Carhill cried triumphantly. The screen focused. The selector swung away from the yellow sun andswept its orbits. The dots that were planets came into focus and out again. Hugh McCann didn't even need to count them, nor to calculate their distance from the sun. He knew the system too well to have any trouble recognizing it. The sun was Sol. The third planet was the double dot of Earth and moon. He realized suddenly that he had more than half expected to see an empty orbit. "It's the Earth all right," Carhill said. "We're home!" They were all staring at the double dot, where the selector focused sharply now. Hugh McCann alone looked past it, at the background of stars that were strewn in totally unfamiliar patterns across the sky. He sighed. "Look beyond the system," he said. They looked. For a long time they stared, none of them speaking, and then they turned to Hugh, many of them accusingly, as if he himself had rearranged the stars. "How long have we been gone?" Carhill's voice broke. Hugh shook his head. The star patterns were too unfamiliar for even a guess. There was no way of knowing, yet, how long their fiftythree years had really been. ly. He turned back to the screen and stared at the still featureless dot that was the Earth. "We can't be the only ones left," he said. No one answered him. They were still stunned. They couldn't even accept, yet, the strange constellations on'the screen. End of the voyage. Fifty-three years of searching for worlds with life. And now Earth, under an unfamiliar sky, and quite possibly no life at all, anywhere, except on the ship. "We might as well land," McCann said. The ship curved away from the night side of the Earth and crossed again into the day. They were near enough so that the planetary features stood out sharply now, even through the dense clouds that rose off the oceans. But although the continental land masses and the islands were clearly defined, they were as unrecognizable as the star constellations had been. "That must be North America," Amos Carhill said dully. "It's smaller than the continent on the night side..." "It might be anywhere," Hu McCann said. "We can't tell. The oceans look bigger too. There's less land surface." He stared down at the topoggraphy thousands of miles below them. Mountains rose jaggedly. There were great plains, and crevasses, and a rocky, lifeless look everywhere. No soil. No erosion, except from the wind and the rains. "There's no chlorophyll in the spectrum," Haines said. "It seems to rule out even plant life." "I don't understand." Martha Carhill turned away from the screen. "Everything's so different. But the moon looked just exactly like it always did." "That's because it has no atmosphere," Hugh said. "So there's no erosion. And no oceans to sweep in over the land. But I imagine that if we explored it we'd find changes. New craters. Maybe even new mountains by now." "How long has it been?" Carhill whispered. "And even if it's been Why aren't there any plants? Won't we find anything?" "Maybe there was an atomic war," the pilot said. "Maybe." Carhill had thought of that too. Probably all of them had. "Or maybe the sun novaed." No one answered him. The concept of a nova and then of its dying down, until now the sun was just as it had been when they left, was too much. "The sun looks hotter," Carhill added. The ship dropped lower, its preliminary circle of the planet completed. It settled in for a landing, just as it had done thousands of times before. And the world below could have been any of a thousand others. They dropped quickly, braking through the atmosphere, riding it down. The topography came up to meet them and the general features blurred, leaving details standing out sharply, increasing in sharpness as if the valleys and mountains below were tiny microscopic crystals under a rapidly increasing magnification. The pilot picked their landing place without difficulty. It was a typical choice, a spot on the broad shelving plain at the edge of the ocean. The type of base from which all tests on a planet could be run quickly, and a report written up, and the files of another world closed and tagged with a number and entered in one of the great storage encyclopedias. Even to Hugh there was an air of unreality about the landing, as if this planet wasn't really Earth at all, despite its orbit around the sun, despite its familiar moon. It looked too much like too many others. The actual landing was over quickly. The ship quivered, jarred slightly, and then was still, resting on the gravelled plain that had obviously once been part of the ocean bed. The ocean itself lay only, a few hundred yards away. Hugh McCann looked out through the viewscreen, turned to direct vision now. He stared at the waves swelling against the shore and his sense of unreality deepened. Even though this was what he had more than half expected, he couldn't quite accept it, yet. "We might as well go out and look arormd," he said. "Air pressure. Earth-norm." Haines began checking off the control panel by rote. "Composition: oxygen, nitrogen, water vapor -- " "There's certainly nothing out there that could hurt us," Martha Carhill snapped. "What could there be?" "We might check for radioactivity," Hugh said quietly. She turned and stared at him. Her mouth opened and then snapped shut again. "No," Haines said. "There's no radioactivity either. Everything's clear. We won't need space suits." He pressed the button that opened the inner locks. and then switched on the communicator, and the noises from the rest of the ship flooded into the control room. Everywhere people drifted in, caught up in the background as various duty officers, reported clearance on the landing. Most of the background voices were young, talking too loudly and with too much forced cheerfulness about what lay outside the ship. Hugh sighed, as aware of all the people as if he were out in the corridors with them. It was the spaceborn ones who were doing most of the talking. The children, the young people, the people no longer young but still born since the voyage started, still looking upon Earth more as a wonderful legend than as their own place of origin. The old ones, those who had left the Earth in their own youth, had the least of all to say. They knew what was missing outside. The younger ones couldn't really know. Even the best of the books and the pictures and the three dimensional movies can give only a superficial idea of what a living world is like. "Hugh." Carhill clutched his arm. "Yes, Amos." "There must be people, somewhere. There have to be. Our race can't be dead." Hugh McCann looked past him, out at the sky and the clouds of water vapor that swirled up to obscure the sun. The stars, of course, were completely hidden in the daylight." "If there are any others, Amos, we can be pretty certain they're not on Earth." "They may have left. They .may have gone somewhere else." "No!" Martha Carhill's face twisted and then went rigid. "There's no one anywhere. There can't be. It's been too long. You saw the stars, Amos -- the stars -- all wrong, every one of them!" Her hands came up to her face and she started to cry. Amos crossed over to her and put his arms around her. Hugh McCann watched them for a moment and then he turned and left them and went out through the locks after the young people. He didn't know what to think. He wished that they had never turned back to Earth at all, that they had kept going, circling around the rim of the galaxy forever. ,He went through the outer lock and then down the ramp to the ground. He stood on the Earthagain, for the first time since his' early youth. And it was not the same. There was bare rock under his feet and bare rock all around him,gravel and boulders and even fine grained sand. But no dust. No dirt. No trace of anything organic or even ever touched by anything organic. He had walked too many worlds like this. Too many bare gray worlds with bare gray oceans and clouds of vapor swirling up into the warm air. Too many worlds where there was wind and sound and surf j where there should have been life, but wasn't. This was just another of those worlds. This wasn't Earth. This was just a lifeless memory of the Earth he had known and loved. For fifty-three years they had clung to the thought of home, of people waiting for them, welcoming them back someday. Fifty-three years, and for how many of those ship-years had Earth lain lifeless like this? He looked up at the sky and at all the stars that he couldn't see and he cursed them all and cursed time itself and then, bitterly, his own fatuous stupidity. The people came out of the ship and walked about on the graveled plain, alone or in small groups. They had stopped talking. They seemed too numbed by what they had found to even think, for a while. Shock, Hugh McCann thought grimly. First'hysteria and tears and loud unbelief, and now shock. Anything could come next. H e stood with the warm wind blowing in his face and watched the people. In the bitter mood that gripped him he was amused by their reactions. Some of them walked around aimlessly, but most, those who were active in the various departments, soon started about the routine business of running tests on planetary conditions. They seemed to work without thinking, by force of habit, their faces dazed and uncaring. Conditioning, Hugh thought. Starting their reports. The reports that they know perfectly well no one will ever read. He wandered over to where several of the young men were sending up aU atmosphere balloon and jotting down the atmospheric constituents as recorded by the instruments. "How's it going?" he said. "Earth-norrn. Naturally -- " The young man flushed. "Temperature's up though. Ninety-three. And a seventy-seven percent humidity." He left them and walked down across the .rocks to the ocean's edge. Two young girls were down there before him, sampling the water, running both chemical and biological probing tests. "Hello, Mr. McCann," the taller girl said dully. "Want our report?" "Found anything?" He knew already that there was nothing to find. If there were life the instruments would have recorded its presence. "No. Water temperature eightysix. Sodium chloride four-fifths Earth normal." She looked up, surprised. "Why so low?" "More water in the ocean, maybe. Or maybe we've had a nova since we were here last." It was getting late, almost sunset. Soon it would be time for the photographic star-charts to be made. Hugh brought himself up short and smiled bitterly. He too was in the grip of habit. Still, why not? Perhaps they could estimate. years had passed. Why? What good would it do them to find out? After a while the sun set and a little later the full moon nose, hazy and indistinct behind the clouds of water vapor. Hugh stared at it, watched it rise higher until it cleared the horizon, a great bloated bulk. Then he sighed and shook his head to clear it and started to work. The clouds were thick. He had to move the screening adjustment almost to its last notch before the vapor patterns blocked out and the stars were bright and unwavering and ready to be photographed. He inserted the first plate and snapped the picture of the stars whose names he knew but whose patterns were wrong, some subtly, some blatantly. There was something he was overlooking. Some other factor, not taken into account. He developed the first plates and compared them with the star charts of Earth as it had been before they left it, and he shook his head. Whatever the factor was, it eluded him. He went back to work. "Oh, here you are, Hugh." He jumped at the sound of Carhill's voice. He had been working almost completely by habit, slowly swinging the telescope across the sky and snapping the plates. And trying to think. "Why waste time on that?" Carhill added bitterly. "Who's ever going to see our records now?" Behind Garhill, several of the other old ones nodded. Hugh was surprised that they had managed to come back to the ship without his hearing them. But of course they had come back in at sundown, as usual on a routine check, and now they were gathering to compile their reports. Hugh looked from face to face, wondering if he too was as iipmb and dazed and hag gard appearing as they were. He probably was. "What do you suggest; Amos?" he said. "I say there's no use going on," Carhill said flatly. "You've all run your tests. And what have you found? No fossils. Not even a single-celled life form in the ocean. No way even to tell how many millions of years it's been." "Maybe it hasn't been so long," Haines said. "Maybe something happened here fairly recently, and the people all went to some other system -- to one of the Centauri planets, maybe." Amos Carhill laughed bitterly. "You can say that in the face of the of years have passed. Nothing's the same. Even the tides are three times what they were. It's qjpvious what happened. The sun novaed. Novaed and cooled. Do you really believe that our race has lasted that long, on some nearby system?" H IS voice rose. He glared about at the others. He threw back his head suddenly and laughed, and the laughter echoed and re-echoed off the steel walls. "I say let's dienow!" Carhill cried. "There's no use going on, Hugh was right, as usual. We shouldn't have tried to come back. We've been fools, all these years, thinking we had a world to come home to." The people muttered, crowded closer. They pushed into the observation room, shoved nearer to it in the outside corridor. They muttered in a rising note of panic as the numbing shock that gripped them gave way. "Why not die here?" Martha Carhill's voice rose shrill above the sound of her husband's laughter. of years ago!" Hugh McCann looked at her and at Amos and at all the others. He sighed. Why not? Why go on? There was no answer. Even a pragmatist gave up eventually, when the facts were all against him. He glanced down at the reports on the table. All the routine reports, gathered together into routine form, written up in routine terminology. Reports on an Earthtype planet that just happened to be the Earth itself. And then, quite suddenly, the obvious, satisfactory answer came to him. The factors clicked into place, and he wondered why he hadn't thought of them long ago. He looked up from the reports, at the people on the verge of panic, and he knew what to say to quiet them. He had the factors now. "No!" he cried. "You're wrong. There's no reason at all to assume that our race is dead!" Ames Carhill stopped laughing and stared at him and the others stared also and none of them believed him at all. "It's simple!" he cried. "Why has so much time passed outside the ship while to us only fifty-three years have gone by?" "Because we traveled too fast," Carhill said flatly. "That's , why." "Yes," Hugh said softly. "But there's one thing we've been forgetting. What we did, others could do also. Probably lots of expeditions started out after we left, all trying for the speed of light." They stared at him. Slowly the dazed look died out of their eyes as they realized what he meant, and what the concept might mean to them. The concept of other ships, following them out into time. The of years from the Earth they had left. "You mean," Carhill said slowly, "that you believe other people got caught in the same trap we did -- that there may be others in this time also?" Hugh nodded. "Why not? Maybe they colonized some of those Earth-type planets we checked on. Anyway, we can look for them." "No." Carhill shook his head. "If any of them had started after us we would have crossed their paths already. We never have. We never found a trace of any other expedition. Even if there is another, even if there are colonies somewhere, we could spend another fifty years looking." "Well," Martha Carhill whispered. "Why not? It would give us something to look for." Hugh McCann glanced around the circle of faces and saw the new hope that came into them, the new belief that sprang into existence so quickly because they wanted to believe. He smiled, somewhat sadly, and picked up the pile of reports and the photographs he had just developed. Then he slipped out of the room, through the crowd outside, away from them and the rising hum of their voices. He didn't need to say anything more. The ship would go on. JI "Yes, Nora." She was waiting for him in the corridor. She came up to him and smiled and slipped her arm through his. They walked on together, down the hall past the last of the people. "I heard what you said, Hugh. You convinced them." He nodded. "I wonder why it took me so long to think of it." The voices died away behind them. They were all alone. They rounded a corner where a viewscreen picked up the image of the moon, so familiar, now the only thing that was familiar about this Earth. Nora shivered. "You were very logical, Hugh. But I didn't believe you." He glanced around and saw that there was no one near them and that the communicators in this part of the ship were turned off. Only then did he answer her. "I didn't believe myself, Nora." "Tell me." "When we're outside." They went down the winding ramp that led to the interior of the ship. It too was deserted now. They left the carpeted, muffled corridors and their footsteps rang on the steel plates that lay down the middle of the ship, its heart, where the energy converters were, and the disposal units, and the plant rooms, and the great glass spheres of the hydroponies tanks. "'It's ironic, isn't it?" Nora said slowly. "We left here so long ago, looking for worlds with life, and we come back to find our own world dead." "It's ironic, all right." He walked along the row of tanks until he came to the one he was searching for, and then he picked up a glass cylinder and filled it from the tank. "I had to tell them something, Nora. They couldn't have gone on, otherwise." The bottle ws full. He stoppered it and then turned away. They crossed to the nearest lock and he pushed the button that opened it. They waited a few minutes until the door came open, and then they went out, down the ramp to the ground, across the slippery rocks. Even through the clouds there was enough light to see by. "It's warm," she said. "It always is, now." They were approaching the ocean. The surf beat loudly in theif ears. The spray was warm against their faces, almost as warm as the night wind. "Tell me," she said. "You know what really happened, don't you?" "I think so. I can't really be sure." They paused on the low ledge where he had stood earlier and watched the girls gather their data for the reports. At their feet the waves washed up to the edges of tjie tide pools, eddying into and out of them softly. The water looked dark and cold, but they knew that it too was warm. "There've been lots of changes, and they all fit a pattern," he said. "The temperature. The difference in salt content in the water. The higher tides. Those things could happen for several reasons. But there's only one explanation for the other changes, the ones I found on the star charts." She waited. The water lapped in and out, reaching almost to where they stood. "The Earth rotates faster now," he said. "And the stars are nearer. Much nearer than they were." "Isn't that impossible?" "How do we know? We exceeded the speed of light. Who could say what continuum that might have put us in? I remember an analogy I read once, in a layman's book on different theories of space-time. '-" The future and the past, twO branches of a hyperbola, each with the speed of light as its limit -- ' " "You mean," she whispered, "that we're not in the future at all? We're in the past -- the far past -- before there was any life on Earth?" H e looked down at the pools of water at their feet, the lifeless water that according to all their old discarded theories should have been teeming with life. He nodded slowly and lifted the glass cylinder he had brought from the ship and stared at it. "That bottle," she whispered. "You filled it with bacteria, didn't you?" He nodded again. "You're mad, Hugh. You can't mean that that bottle is the origin of life on Earth! You can't." "Maybe this isn't our Earthj Nora. Maybe there are thousands of continuums and thousands of Earths, all waiting for a ship to land someday and give them life." Slowly he unstoppered the cylinder and knelt down at the water's edge. For a minute he pau.sed, wondering if there were other continuums or only this one, wondering just how deep the paradox lay. Then he tipped the bottle up and poured, and the liquid from the cylinder ran down into the tide pools and eddied there and was lost in the liquid of the ocean. He poured until the bottle was empty and all the single-celled bacteria from the ship's tank mingled with the warm, lifeless waters. The water temperatures were the same. Everything was the same, and the conditions were very favorable and the bacteria would divide and redivide and keep on dividing for "Well hold the ship under light speed," he said. "And in a few million years we can drop back here and see how evolution is getting along." He stood up and she took his hand and moved closer to him. They were both shivering, despite the warmth of the air. "But how did life originate in the beginning?" she asked suddenly. Hugh McCann shook his head in the darkness. "I don't know. We've been all over the galaxy and haven't found life anywhere. Perhaps it can't have a natural cause. Perhaps it's always planted. A closed circle from beginning to end." "But something -- someone -- must have started the circle. Who?" He looked down at the empty cylinder that he had dropped at the water's edge and then he looked out at the ocean, lifeless no longer. And once again he .shook his head. "We did, Nora. We're the beginning." For a long moment their eyes met and held, and then they turned and walked away from the ocean, back toward the ship, and the people. And the moonlight .glinted off the empty bottle.  i 'P ,.m  m I .I Personalities  Today, He Would Be Amazed as the father of science fiction as it is known today, one can immediately draw sharp criticism from those who allocate the role to Leonardo da Vinci. It is an honor, however, that the great Italian could easily give away as a crumb from his table. And one Verne must have in order to gain the stature he deserves, and also as payment for well nigh incredible work as a pioneer. Verne, a Frenchman, was bom in # in Nantes. There was neither great wealth, nor excessive poverty in his background. He received an adequate education, and if there was any point of particular interest in his youth, it was the vague, but definitely tangible restlessness that plagued his early years. He became a fairly successful playwright long before there is any indication of his later interest in the scientific fiction through which his name will live. A close study of Verne, highlights the fact that he himself is only half his own story. To get the full picture, he must be considered along with the time in which he lived. It was a time of the colossal French unrest that ended in one of the greatest bloodbaths in history. The masses -- a designation so dear to the heart of the ponderous hi.storian -- were stirring under the perfumed heels of the French aristocrats. Every school child knows what happened. But another revolution of the period, centered in the industrial Europe of the times, has been to a great extent overlooked or generalized, perhaps because itsfendresult was not outlined by the sharp blade of a guillotine. The industrial revolution. The intellectual level, nay the intelligence level, of the period was low, but there was enough perception to fear the Machine and what it could do. Science was a completely unknown and untried component. The theory of science creating machines which would in turn free men from previously necessitous slavery was not readily grasped. Such a concept had to come from some proof in that direction, and at that time there was no proof. There was, however, even then, proof that machines could put vast numbers of men out of work. Under the systems of the seventeenth century, this could mean actual starvation for people who earned their bread in the labor market. It is little wonder, then, that science was a thing to be feared and this point, in itself, makes Jules Verne not only a pioneer, but a very remarkable literary technician. To understand a man, it is necessary to understand what he faces. To get the picture, we have but to compare his time with ours. T he writer . of today has little else to do but experience an urge to write and then look around for his field. If he selects science fiction as his creative medium, he finds a well worn rut into which to fit his steering gear. The momentum has already been provided. He rides along in an established field, partaking of the dignity built by those who came before. Verne was the first of these. He faced a world that really did not want what he had -- or rather -- what his imagination and instinct forced him to produce. He won his audience from a fearful, reluctant public, who cringed from what he gave them, yet read it from pure fascination. His works are filled, of course with a perceptive power. Perhaps very few people today would care for them. They are styled to another day, a slower and more ponderous day when the streamlined stylism of today's literature would have been ,as quickly rejected as some of us, today, reject the styles of the old masters. in that it is i a mixture of astounding perceptions and naive inconsistencies. The inconsistencies, however, spring from the limitations of the time; limitations which even a genius of Verne's stature could not overcome. As an example, there is an illustration of one of his books on a trip to the Moon. The picture is meant to highlight the absolute cold of space. It shows three men, obviously halfway to the Moon, inside their rocket. The room, or cabin, they occupy is that of a typical, seventeenth century parlor. It could have as easily illustrated a scene from a Charles Dickens novel. The three men are dressed for the street -- for a warm day in the street, that is -- because they haven't a single overcoat among them. One wears a top hat and the other two have shawls over their heads. They are crouched, and stomping their feet to keep warm. There seems to be some snow drifting in from somewhere. But those who would laugh at this illustration, could be quickly silenced by a drawing of an undersea burial, the stunning impact of w'hich has probably never been equalled to this day. Save for an ancient handlamp held by one of the mourners, the illustration would do far more than justice to any current science fiction story of underwater activities. There are many indications that Jules Veme did not write scientific fiction from choice; that he possibly nurtured an actual dislike for it. He left the field many times to further other literary ends. But he always came back; possibly because his vital and entirely original imagination would not let him do otherwise. He produced a prodigious amount of copy, all of which in its day, was widely read. But it is natural that a writer is remembered for certain of his works, while the bulk of his efforts is lost in the sweep of time. Of all his works. Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea, could be rated as his greatest. Possibly because, in this story, he described with inconceivable accuracy, the almost exact shape of a single thing to c#me. The submarine. H IS Around the World in Eighty Days will also, probably live as long as books are read. But the impact here is somewhat blunted in that Verne accurately foretold a general future condition -- the speed at which man would someday travel, by whatever method. Also, the story is somewhat blurred by the fact that even Verne himself cauld not envision a condition which time and progress would not antiquate. His error here was that he left qn opening for a sequal -- Around the World in Eighty Minutes. This situation does not hold true in Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea. After reading it, one can experience only anticlimax no matter what has been or will be. When Veme finished, there was no more to be said. But regardless, Verne's niche is secure. In a dim and groping past, he established, with a quill pen and an agile mind, a trend in scientific fiction from which the writer of today or tomorrow will deviate but little. -- pwf It was in neither the stars nor the cards that Dr. Mateo Marco Lope Aguirre Malaria, the eminent jurist, should retain his neck... By L Sprague de Camp Aguirre Malaria, the eminent jurist, sat at a table in the bar of the Convention Quarters and wept into his rum. These Quarters were those of the World Government Constitutional Convention, in a set of concrete chambers deep underground in the Rhone Valley. The accommodations had been hastily converted from the former Supreme Headquarters, United Civilized State's, Convention was taking place in this armored warren, first, because most of the earth's larger cities had taken hits in the war and were therefore short of housing -- when they had any houses left at all; second, because the war was not cmite over. A Communist force still held out in the Altai Mountains, and for all anyone knew they might have a missle or two left with which to scotch the Convention if it met on the surface. A journahst named Dagobert Heck sat down at the same table and asked : "Why do you weep. Dr. Aguirre?" "My friend," said Aguirre, "I weep because we are off on the wrong track. Once again we fail to grasp opportunity by the forelock." "Oh, I don't know," said Dagobert Heck. "Considering what the world has been through lately -- most of its cities mashed flat and a forget that this is not the only sun to bits -- I think we're doing better Heck nodded sympathetically, than we had any right to expect. Aguirre went on; We're getting a bigger improve"And others, I think, hope to dement on the United Nations than feat the clause so that they can the United Nations was on the carry on nationalistic and ImperialLeague of Nations. The new World istic policies, if not on the earth. Government will have a directly then off it somewhere." elected legislature, the right to tax, "Look here, are you sure the fact and the world's only armed force, that you're the author of this clause Ten years ago we'd have said this hasn't prejudiced you?" was utopian moonshine. Why then "Sir, I have no prejudices!" so sad?" Aguirre lowered his voice. "Save "Because these narrow-minded, perhaps a slight one in favor of livso-called statesmen cannot look being." yond the petty confines of their own "What do you mean?" planet!" "You know my glorious chief?" "Ohj you mean the Space Clause." Heck closed his eyes and troversial clause from memory;lAous chief was Juan Serafin de " 'The authority shall have the exla Torre Baroja, President of the elusive right to represei the peoAndean Federation, a new political pies of the earth in relations with entity that had taken the place, extra-terrestrial life-forms, should amid the general uproar of World exist; to limit, regulate, and forbid western South America. Not satisintercourse between the peoples of fied with making himself president the earth and such life-forms; and for life of Andea, la Torre had apto limit, regulate, and forbid movepointed himself head of the Andean ment of persons and things between delegation to the Convention so as the earth and other heavenly to have a personal finger in the new bodies -- ' Oh well, it's probably not constitutional pie. vital. We've been to the moon and "Well," said Aguirre, "he is, as found nothing but a few viruses, you know, a man of the utmost and conditions don't look promising sense of. personal dignity. I -- ah -- for life on the other planets either." sold him on this Space Clause, as "Exactly what that fool Carypu would express it, with the result staIrs-Brown said!" Aguirre mimthat he has placed the Andean deleicked the speech of the British gation squarely behind it and made delegate. " 'Really, you know, speeches in its behalf. Now if the wouldn't Her Majesty's Governclause is not adopted he will feel ment look a bit silly getting all set to that his honor has been insulted, welcome the Martians, and having And since he cannot take his feelit transpire there aren't any?' They ings out on Carstairs-Brown and the other skeptics, he will vent them on me." "What'll he do? Can you?" "If that were all! Did you not hear how he had fourteen political opponents shot without trial before taking off for this Convention?" "I probably did. So he's the guy who calls himself the great democratic liberator?" "Oh, but he is! Think of all the things that he has done for the mass -- free parades, extra holidays to hear his speeches, and all the rest! But these now-dead politicians were criticising him in public. Naturally he could not tolerate such insults tohis dignity, or the people would have doubted his virility and thrown him out. After all, one must remaip respected. But that, alas, will not save my neck." "Too bad," .said Dagobert Heck. "You Andeans have certainly done all you could to put the clause across. Short of having a spaceship land with a load of little green men with tentacles -- Hey!" Heck frowned into his drink. "That gives me an idea. There's an old friend of mine in India named Dick Nugent, used to work with me on the World-Telegram-Sun. He retired a few years ago to become a yogi. Maybe -- Say, when does this clause come up for a final vote?" "Tomorrow, if the meeting goes according to schedule." Heck consulted his watch. "Excuse me. I think I can just make it." "Make what?" asked Aguirre. But Dagobert Heck had gone. Myron Kalish, the American Secretary of State, took his turn as president of the Convention the following noon. His bland exterior concealed a battalion of worries that would have floored a lesser man, the chief being that after all his toil and travail the Senate of the United States would insert a long sharp knife into his back by refusing to ratify the new Constitution. Already senators from the Middle West were talking ominously about "giving away the rights that our boys fought and died for at Valley Forge, Antietam, Chateau-Thierry, Midway, and Teheran... N evertheless Kaiish prepared to call the meeting to order. With luck the Steering Committee should be able to wind the thing up in three more days. Most of the terms and clauses of the document had already been agreed upon. There remained only the controversial questions of what power if any the World Government should have over tariffs and immigration, and this silly Space Clause in which Juan de la Torre seemed so inexplicably interested. Kalish thought such a provision absurd, but did not wish to offend la Torre, who despite his domestic sins had brought the Andean Federation into the war on the side of the United States. Kalish was opening his mouth to speak when the .sight of a messenger-boy hurry'ing down an aisle stopped him. It must be pretty urgent or the guards would never have let the boy through during the actual .session. The boy walked up to the President's desk and handed a fistful of radiogram forms to Kalish, who said "Thank you" in an absentminded way and peered at the forms. The boy murmured "Bienvenu, monsieur," and walked off. Kalish swallowed as he read. The message was one long radiogram running over a half-dozen sheets. At last he laid down the message and spoke into the microphone : "The meeting will please come to order. The first item on today's agenda is the so-called Space Clause proposed by the delegation from the Andean Federation. It was planned to conclude arguments pro and contra this clause and vote on it this afternoon. However, news has just reached me which, if authenticated, has so great a bearing on the adoption of this clause that I think I should read it to you. It is a Reuters dispatch from Dar jeeling, India, and reads as follows : November fifth. An object described as a spaceship of extraterrestrial origin landed yesterday in eastern Nepal, near the Tibetan border in the vicinity of Kishanganj. First reports indicate that the beings who man the ship are green bipeds nine feet tall with tentacles for arms. Their intentions are said to be friendly. The arrival of a visitor from outer space is confirmed by a number of witnesses in Sikkim, over which the ship slowly passed while looking for a landing-place. In view of the enormous importance of this arrival, both as proving the longsurmised existence of intelligent extra-terrestrial life and as bearing upon the political organization of the world to deal with the problems posed by this fact, the government of Nepal has waived its usual prohibition against entry of foreigners into the country to permit qualified experts and officials of the Indian Government to investigate the visitors. As Prime Minister Rajendrachandramohananath of Nepal expressed it in a telephone-call to Darjeeling, "For the sake of God, sirs, let wise men be sent forthwith to cope with this appalling manifestation. We of Nepal are not qualified to do so." Pending the arrival of an official mission of the Indian Government to welcome the visitors in the name of the. peoples of the earth, Richard Nugent, a retired American journalist living in Darjeeling, has crossed the border into Nepal and struck out into the wild region where the ship is said to have come to earth -- K alish finished the radiogram, took off his glasses, and rubbed his eyes with his finger-tips. Then he said: "In view of the imporjnce -- Wilhelm Feuer, of the German delegation, was waving for attention. When recognized he said-. "This is all very impressive, Mr. President, but let us not by our emotions carried.away be. To me it seems that the coincidence of such a landing, just when the so-called Space Clause is under consideration, is simply too perfect to be believed. At least we should await confirmation to be sure that we are not the victims of a hoax."  "As I was about to say," continued Kalish, "in view of the importance of this development, the chair will entertain a motion to defer action on this clause until this time tomorrow." The motion was made and carried, and for the rest of that session the Convention devoted itself to a long wrangle over tariffs. When the meeting adjourned, the members swarmed around the newsstand. By that time the newspapers bore not only the Reuters dispatch that Kalish had read, but a confirmatory Associated Press dispatch giving further information. Richard Nugent, it seemed, had radioed that he had reached the space-ship and met the aliens, who had brought an elaborate equipage of linguistic apparatus, picturebooks and the like, to enable them to get intb communication with the Terrans. Further information was promised soon. Mateo Marco Lope Aguirre Malaria glanced up from his newspaper with a smile of quiet triumph. It seemed to him that the other delegates were looking at each other with a new seriousness. When he had brought up the Space Clause, some had thought it ridiculous because there were no intelligent extra-terrestrials; others preferred to leave all nonessential controversies to the future, counting on amending the Constitution when and if civilized e. t.'s were discovered. Now that the delegates were faced with extra-terrestrial reality, the petty national disputes that had stirred up such high words and hard feelings seemed small. Next morning the papers carried still more information. By working furiously Nugent had gotten into communication with the aliens. He announced that they were from a planet of the small star Ross #. There was a blurry radiophotograph which Nugent had transmitted with his portable set to Darjeeling and which had then been re-transmitted around the world. It showed a bald man standing between two tall things that might have been a backward child's attempt to model a man in plasticene. The Indian party had already flown to Darjeeling and would take off the following day for the spaceship in a helicopter with a television camera... At that afternoon's session, Aguirre braced himself for argument. But none came. In fact one of his bitterest critics, Jacob Atta of Nigeria, rose to say: "While I have been opposed to this clause in the past, the events of the last twenty-four hours have changed my mind, Even If the space-ship should turn out to be a hoax, I now think it advisable to have this clause in the Constitution, just in case." After a minor bicker over the meaning of the world "intercourse," the Convention adopted the Space Clause and went on to the rest of its business. There was little debate; everybody's mind was far away, in the rhinoceros-haunted wilds of Nepal. In fact the President (Bretkun of Lithuania) managed to get compromise proposals on tariffs and immigration adopted that afternoon, leaving nothing to do but make laudatory speeches until the Drafting Committee finished polishing and homogenizing the final draft. The Sheikh of Aden made a speech in Arabic, followed by speeches from delegates of Afghanistan, Albania, and Algeria, and then the meeting adjourned. A guirre was relaxing in the bar when his glorious chidf stalked in and rode up to him. "Aguirre," said la Torre, "we leave tomorrow. Are you ready?" "Carajo! Why, chief?" "I have received word that my enemies conspire against me, so I must get back to Andea at once." "But you will miss the final ratification!" "No; I have arranged it with Kalish and Carstairs-Brown. The Drafting Committee shall work all night and present the Constitution tomorrow morning to a special session. Then I will make my speech -- Andea comes alphabetically after Algeria -- and we shall rush to the airport as soon as I have finished. Get packed." "Yes, yes, chief, of course." And so it was done. La Torre's airplane was over Venezuela when the radio broke the news that the arrival of the extra-terrestrial space-ship had been a hoax after all, perpetrated by a group of journalists including Dagobert Heck and Richard Nugent. The announcer ended with a sardonic note : -- the delegates to the World Government Constitutional Convention are having a hearty laugh over the departing speech made this morning by Senor Juan de la Torre Baroja, in which he boasted in extravagant terms of his authorship of the Space Clause and claimed sole credit for any benefits that might accrue to the earth hereafter as a result of communication yith other civilized planets. However, inquiries at the Convention indicated that there is no present intention of repealing the Space Clause, as this would require procedural complications, and since the clause is regarded as at worst a harmless piece of whimsy -- " Aguirre became conscious of his chiefs glittering black eyes. La Torre rasped: "So! My dignity has been insulted! And who is responsible? Who put me up to backing that accursed Space Clause, saying that it would rebound to the eternal fame and credit of the Andean Federation and its President, the people's choice, Juan Serafin de la Torre Baroja? Who led me astray and exposed me naked to the pitiless laughter of the world? Fool! Poltroon !" The President's voice rose to a scream as he added details of Aguirre's ancestry and love-life. He caught Aguirre by the lapels and shook the smaller man until the latter's teeth rattled. He slapped his face, forehand and backhand, a dozen times, then hurled the eminent jurist from him, shouting: "Guards! Tie up this filth until I can deal with him in a more appropriate manner!" In the prison, Aguirre stood on the trap with the rope around his neck. In one corner his wife and his mistress sobbed quietly in each other's arms. In front of him stood la Torre with fists on well-padded hips, grinning ferociously. "Ha!" snarled the President. "So, you thought I should weaken and let you go for old times sake? Have you ever known me to forget an insult to my dignity?" "No, sir," said Aguirre miserably. "If you are going to hang me, will you please get it over with?" "I will hang you when I am ready. I have had requests from many quarters, including the President of the United States himself, to let you off. I threw these impertinent requests back in their faces! I told them that if I heard any more such mush, I should refuse to ratify the Constitution! That is what I, Juan Serafin de la Torre Baroja, think of the rest of the world! Well, hangman, are you ready?" "Ready, chief," replied the hangman. La Torre gave the final command. The hangman did his duty. The wife and mistress screamed in perfect timing with the snap of the rope. Dr. Aguirre departed for happier climes. While the body still swung, an officer of the Federal Police hurried on the scene. He said, "Chief, you won't believe this, but -- " "But what?" "The ambassador Mencias Mola is here with a visitor. This visitor is one of a group who arrived in Mexico a few hours ago. Senor Mencias flew this one here as fast as possible." La Torre gaped. The visitor blinked three of his seven eyes and extended a tentacle. La Torre took the tentacle in his right hand and shook it. The other four eyes of the visitor were trained upon the figure dangling on the scaffold, with -- la Torre thought -- a definite indication of curiosity. "Does he," la Torre asked the officer, "speak the language of my people?" "Oh yes. Very smart, these extraterrestials." "We have machines that teach quickly frorn your radio broadcasts," the e. t. said. "Ah -- the suspended individual -- " "A martyr to his country. A paragon of wisdom and loyalty. Even now I am planning a special medal for him." La Torre stepped close to the scaffold and peered upward through experienced eyes. "It will of course be awarded posthumously," he said with marked sadness. "ril give you the cure for the most horrible disease," Songeen said. "The sickness of life itself." Newlin replied, "Fine. But first, give me a couple of minutes to kill your husband. T hen we'll go on from there" Shock Treatment . I By Stanley Mullen night, it is difficult to tell for certain where the town leaves off and the pink elephants begin. It is difficult to tell about other things, too. Spud Newlin had heard that a man could sometimes get rich overnight just tending bar on such occasions, and he was putting the rumor to the test. Not many bartenders had lasted long enough to find out. The night had had a good start. Clock hands over the bar in the Spacebell registered #:# Venustime, and considering, things were almost dull at the moment. The The spolight meant violence and sudden death. place had been jumping earlier, but hilarity had worn itself out, the dead had been removed and excitement dulled. No relatives or widows of the dead sportsmen had yet appeared; all corpses-elect had died clean, with the minimum of messy violence and, surprisingly, only three moreor less innocent bystanders had been burned down in the proceedings. After shattering uproar, such calm was disturbing. Newlin was actually getting bored. Then she came in -- and he was no longer bored. But, perversely, he resented the surge of interest that ran through him at sight of this out-of-place girl. At a casual glance, she might seem ordinary, but Newlin was never superficial. Her kind of beauty was something to be sensed, not catalogued. It was part of the odd grace of movement, of the fine, angular features, of the curious emotion which dwelt upon them, sad and subdued. Even her costume was as out of place in the Spacebell as her mood; the dress was simply cut and expensive, but drab for the time and place. It clung about a slight, well-formed body in smoothly curved lines that seemed almost a part of her. Only her hands and eyes showed nervous tension. At first he thought her eyes were cold, but it was something racial rather than personal. He noticed that they were large and luminous -- like moonstones -- with a pearly opaque glimmer as if only upper layers colored and reflected light. In their depths was an odd effect, like metalflakes drifting through ribboned moonlight with abysses of deepest shadow beyond. There was pain, trouble, and sadness in them, and behind that, fear -- a desperate fear. You thought of wailing, haunted moonlight, and of dreadful things fled from in dreams. Newlin's first thought was that she was one of the new-made widows, and was likely to be all too human about it. Later, when he had begun to doubt that she was allhuman, her physical charms still went inside him and turned like a dull knife. He was no morft immune to animal attraction than the next man, but in this particular woman there was something else even more intriguing and unpredictable. He felt a powerful impulse to do something to relieve her of that paralyzing supernatural dread. A situation pregnant with violence was working up at one of the gaming tables but Newlin wilfully tore his attention from the mounting tension between the fat Martian gambler and an ugly character from Ganymede. "Anything I can do for you, sister?" Her smile was strange, thoughtful, preoccupied. "Yes," she told him. "There is something you can do for me. Unless your question was purely professional. If so, forget it. I need something stronger than the -- the liquors you serve here." Newlin grinned sourly. "You' don't know our drinks. One sip and a mouse snarls at a snow-leopard. The question was not purely professional. Not my profession, anyhow. I don't know about yours. Or do I?" H er head jerked on its slender stalk of neck. Pale eyes stared into his; her lips twisted in cold scorp. "i don't think you do. And I'll do without your help. Perhaps you'd better go back to polishing glassware." The rebuke failed to impress Newlin. He waited while her glance swung about the room, evaluating the place and its occupants in one quick sweep. Dissatisfied, she turned back to Newlin and again the moonstruck eyes probed and assessed him. "Take your pick," he said sharply. "But don't judge them by their clothes. On Venus, a man in ragged spaceleather may have heavy pockets. Now, take me -- " "I was told I could find Spud Newlin here. Point Kim out and I'll pay your fee -- " Newlin was suddenly cautious. "Yes, he's here -- but what would a woman like you want with such a notorious -- " "I'm asking questions, not answering," she said calmly. "And I'm well aware of his failings. I selected him because of his... his reputation. It's revolting, but even such a man may have uses. My requirements of him, and my reasons for the choice, I will discuss with him. No one else." "Free advice, sister. Forget it, and get out of here. He's no good. Particularly bad, for a choice morsel like you." "I'm used to making up my own mind. Where is he?" Newlin shrugged. "You win. I'm Newlin. You take it from there." Incredulity flooded her face and slowly drained away. "You! Yes, you could be Newlin. But you're working here. A famous man like you. Why?" Newlin laughed easily. "It's very simple. I need money. If I can last through till morning. I'll have it. Now I'll ask the questions. You answer them. What do you want? Why me?" A variety of expressions flowed over her mobile features. "But -- you could leave?" she faltered.  "I could, but I won't. This isn't charity night, kid. So go home and come back another, time. Tomorrow." "Tomorrow won't do. Maybe I've chosen the wrong man, but there's no time for second chances. I wanted a man with courage, a man used to living dangerously and going his own way, a man who wouldn't ask questions and would do anything for money. You sounded like something out of the old books; a rogue; a rebel." Newlin sighed. Did it show so much? From the gutter that spawned him, he had fought and gouged and elbowed his way up. To him all men were enemies. As a spacebum, he had explored the raw, expanding frontiers as Man surged from planet to planet. As a hunted outlaw he had existed perilously on the twilight fringes of civilization. Ruthless and savage, a thief and despoiler, a criminal and adventurer, he had found his way back to Earth, Mars, Venus and wrested a niche of sorts within the citadCjls he had attempted to overthrow.! Despite the brittle amnesty, he knew that authority awaited only a single slip to deal with him according to their views. But in the bitterness of ultimate disillusions, he had found the fountainhead as lacking in civilization and sanity as its furthest riples. He longed, now, only for the final gesture of rejection. Escape... "I had expected more of Newlin," said the girl. laugh. "So had I. My character is as corrupt as the rest of mankind. Poverty is' undignified and degrading; it poisons virtue and debases the outlook. Without money a man cannot claim his birthright of freedom ; getting money he loses his independence and his character." "You think money would make you free?" the girl asked... "Not of itseih" Newlin scowled. "With money, a free man can be free; a slave with money is still a slave. Perhaps I want to learn for myself which I am. I want enough to pay for a spaceship, the best to he had. A one-man ship in which I can escape this madhouse and venture alone -- beyond Pluto. Such a plan requires money, so I work in the Spacebell. Between wages, tips, graft and my winnings, I may have half enough, by dawn. If I live that long." The girl nodded, then spoke contemptuously, "I can pay very generously. You can set your own price. Enough even for your spaceship. But what do you expect to find -- beyond Pluto?" "Myself, first. After that, who knows? This solar system is a vast pesthouse. I am contaminated by fools, moneygrubbers, sheep and the corrupt authorities that rule them. What else I find isn't important if I find myself. Even death." Newlin's eyes burned with a hot glare of fanaticism. Dread sprang info the girl's heart. Always with these people there was this fear, this panic-desire to escape, always an urge to destruction coupled with eery mysticism, compulsions, conflicts -- and always the final delusion of personal sanity in the atmosphere of chaos. Some of Newlin's words found echo in herself, but she checked a momentary sympathy. The system was mad, true -- but how sane was Newlin? How sane and trustworthy? He could be a dangerous tool in her unskilled, frightened hands. She had chosen him on the basis of his reputation. From his police record, and other documents. A capable man, courageous and selfreliant, ingenious, but a person of tensions and conflicts, a man of violence, unpredictable, tom by contradictory impulses, a savage but not without kindness and generosity. For her purposes, he might do as well as any other. At worst a man, cast in heroic mold. Quickly, but not without revulsions and reservations, she made fateful decision. "For a man of your talents," she said, "the task should be simple. I want you to break into a building and bring me something. There is danger you would not understand. If you fail, death for both of us. For success, you set the price. Are you interested?" Newlin laughed cynically. "You promi.se the moon if I can steal it for you, nothing if I can't?" "No such shrewd bargaining," the girl murmured uneasily. "But name the amount you hoped to make here. I will match it now -- and double it if you accomplish my errand." "Fair enough," said Newlin. "But kejep your money. I'll case the job first. Pay me later -- if I don't change my mind again." Ducking behind the bar, he shed his apron and buzzed for the standin bartender. Ed Careld forsook his interminable game of Martian chess and appeared to take over. "Seems quiet," he said. "What's up?" "Nothing," Newlin told him. "Private business. I may not be back. Keep an eye on Table Three." Careld nodded, eyed the gamblers at Table Three dubiously. He tied his apron carefully and sidled toward the table to oversee the situation and clamp down a lid if necessary. Table Three picked that moment to erupt in profane violence. Three languages splashed pungently in dispute which passed quickly to a climax of crisscrossed heat-beam both the fat Martian and his adversary from Ganymede survived, and only two questionable kibitzers blazed into sudden oblivion. Careld swept up the corpses into neat piles of ash, then tried to warn the combatants against further displays of short temper. H e died in an outburst of majority resentment, punctuated by heat-beams. Newlin returned behind the counter and buzzed for Careld's stand-in. Then clutching the girl's arm, he left the place, dragging her along. The street was dim, silent, deserted. "Where to?" asked Newlin. Her quick nod indicated direc- tion. "Walking distance?" he persisted. "Inside the city? If not, I'll have to get protection suits from a public locker." Just inside. Monta Park." Newlin whistled. "Nice neighborhood. Do you live there?" "No," she faltered. "I'm just in from -- Earth." Earth! It was a long time since Newlin had seen Earth. Few of his memories were pleasantly nostalgic. Bom there, in the poorest quarter of the international spaceport of Sahara City, his early life had been hard. Both parents had died there, broken from strain and poverty, and Newlin escaped only by stowing away in the dangerous after-holds of a rocketship bound for Mars, risking the unpleasant death from leaking radioactives in preference to being poor on Earth. He had been poor since, in many places, but never with the grinding hopelessness of those early nightmare years. Their mark stayed with him and colored his life. He knew every rathole of the system, with the same intimacy the rats knew them. Once, on a non-stop express rocket from Mars to Pluto, he had lost a finger and all the toes from his left foot in ceaseless guerilla warfare with rats which had disputed possession of the hold in which he stowed away. More than once he had bummed passage near the atomic fuel vats of cranky old spacefreighters that were mere tin cans caulked with chewing gum. As boy and man, he slept in jails from the dark, mad moons of Neptune to the fiery beach-head colonies of Mercury. And with fists, brain and nimble fingers he had written an epic biography in Security Police annals. Like other cities of the space frontier, Venusport was raw and crude, cxotically beautiful and cruelly violent. To Newlin it was old stuff, picturesque, with the spicy flavor of a perilous vacation spot. After abrasive years on a dozen planets and habitable moons, the ugly savageries of Venus had only a quaint charm. Survival was always comparatively easy there, and a man shed normal fears with the shredding, blistered skin of spaceburns. He was surprised when the girl shuddered and drew close to him. Her instinctive trust amused him, and he laughed brutally. The sound slashed between them like a chilled blade. They went together, in silence. Faint, flat breeze from the city's airconditioners fanned their faces. It was dark enough, and for Venus, reasonably cool. Buildings strewn like a careless giant's toys formed a vague and monstrous backdrop. Street-lighting was poor, for such luxuries are expensive and the city fathers cared little what happened to the poor, diseased, half-starved nonenities. All streets were crooked aimless alleys, all black and empty. Only near landing stages and spacefreight elevators was there any activity. Darkness and the Cyclopean setting gave more menace than intimacy to the dim tangles of avenues and parkways. The girl stopped, panting for breath. Newlin waited for her. "You're a fool to trust yourself alone with me in a place like this," he told her grimly. She hugged the loose mantle tightly across her shoulders and tried vainly to read his face in the murk. "if you're trying to frighten me, you're wasting time," she said "I have more important fears." Newlin chuckled. Skinny wench, but she had something. There was pride in her, and scorn, and a hot spark that burned through the tones of cold scorn. Something else, too. A hint of desperate courage that baffled him. "I still think you should have tried the panther sweat at the Spacebell," he suggested. "One sip and -- " "I know," she snapped. "And I hope you've had yours for tonight. You'll need it. We're almost there." "In that case, we'd better talk," he said curtly. "I still know nothing about you. Who you are, what you want? I don't even know your name." She spoke in low, vibrant tones, but the language seemed unfamiliar to her. She groped for exact words, extracted subtle meanings. But there was a hesitance, an uneasiness, about speech itself, as if she found it a tedious and inflexible medium for thought expressions. "I told you. In a -- building, there is a man I must see. He does not wish to see me, and there are barriers I cannot pass. The building is a combination workshop and living quarters, and something else you would not understand. You must go side for me and induce him to come out to me. My name is Songeen. Tell him that. He will know me, and perhaps he will come. But it has been so long -- " Newlin grunted. "That man I must see. One who wouldn't come when you whistled. However long it has been?" "He has changed -- greatly. He may be insane. He may be dangerous. In self-defense, it may be necessary for you to kill him. For your protection, I have provided a weapon. Use all other means to persuade him first, but threaten if you have to. And be ready to kill if he attacks you. But dead or alive, bring him to me." errand. Even more, he disliked himself. For a brittle moment, he was moved to turn back, refuse to carry out a bargain he now reof a jealous or scorned woman, was too ugly even for his calloused morality. "Preferably dead?" he asked thinly. "Preferably alive," Songeen murmured. "You would not understand, of course. It is because I love him. He will not come, but he must have the chance. And I must send a stranger to kill him, because he has -- forgotten." Newlin stiffened angrily. He was on the point of rejecting the girl and her project when a battery of lights moved toward them from the winding lanes of the Park. Too well he knew what they meant. As the wealthiest district of Venusport, Monta Park was smug, respectable, luxurious -- and protected. Roving radio-patrols of Protection Police -- privately hired thugs -- guarded its dwellers and their possessions. A prowling monocar slowed and maneuvered to cast a revealing spotlight on the loitering pair. Newlin, had he been alone, might have dodged into the dense shrubbery, but the girl knew better. Calmly she turned to face down the occupants of the PP car, and her haughty expression would have chilled the blood of any PP constable presumptuous enough to question her. Her attitude and the obvious richness of her clothing seemed to satisfy the patrol, for the beam swung briefly and hesitated on Newlin. He dropped behind her like a servant bodyguard and hoped his scuffed space-leather was not too noticeable. The beam held for seconds, then flicked out. Soundlessly the patrol car vanished. Neither spoke as the pair moved quickly into the precincts of the Park. As residence area, it was splashy; a series of interlocked estates rather than expensive mansions packed closely together. Each unit sat alone in sprawling, neatly sheared grounds, landscajjed with flowering trees and set with the chill sophistication of statuary in gold, silver and platinum. Botanical splendors from exotic worlds rioted in orderly tangles of aromatic greenery, with sculpture of glass, marble and the noble metals glinting like pale ghosts against the darker masses. Shadows parted before them. Half-hidden among trees rose a slender spire, needle-shaped, tall as a tower, but unwindowed. For a dwelling, its design was curious, and the interior must consist of circular rooms one above the other. At the base, an arched, oval aperture should have been the door, but neither handle nor keyhole showed on the flat, polished plate. "Here we are," the girl said needlessly, her voice soft as a hint of pain trembled in it. A tremor ran through her body as she thrust out two objects toward him. A key and a gun. "You will need these," she went on. "He will be in one of the upper rooms. His name is Genarion. Perhaps he will talk with you, especially if you surprise him. But remember, he is deadly. His scientific knowledge is a more frightful weapon than this. So do not hesitate to use violence." Newlin fumbled the gun into a pocket, fingered the key. It was slim as a needle and as smooth. Without comment, he stared at her as weariness and disgust strangled him. "Tell me your price," she said quickly, as if in haste to get words out before either could think too much. "I will pay -- now." Shabby bargaining, he thought. But he would call her bluff and force her to back down. "Not money," he said savagely. "I don't kill for money. For a woman, yes. I want you." He expected anger, scorn, even hatred. She gasped and her face went pale and hard. Wilting under his glare, she nodded. "Yes, even that -- if you wish. I have no choice." Newlin felt sick, empty. He no longer de.sired her, even if she were self. But a bargain was still a bargain. He shrugged. Like an outsize toy, a child's model of a spaceship, the oddly graceful structure towered upward into arching darkness. Like her, it was slender, radiant, beautiful. Bitterly, he caught the girl, dragged her to him, felt her flesh yielding to him. She leaned and met his lips with hers. The kiss was cold and ugl as writhing snakes. Cold. Ugly. Alien... T he key went in smoothly, did not turn. It must have been impregnated with magnetism. Somewhere electronic relays clicked switches faintly. The door was open, its movement indescribable in familiar terms. It neither slid, nor swung on hinges. There was no door, much as if a light had switched off. A rush of air came out. It had the high, sharp tang of ozone, and something unfamiliar. Newlin stood inside what was obviously an airlock valve. A door inside had opened soundlessly. He went on. Beyond the Inner doorway was a large circular room. Its dimensions seemed far greater than Newlin would have guessed from the exterior of the building. This was no mere dwelling, no laboratory or workshop. It was a spaceship of radical design. Elfin stair-ladders spiralled up and down. The girders seemed impossibly delicate and fragile, as if their purpose was half-decoration, half-functional; and stresses involved were unimportant. Such support framework was insane -- in any kind of spaceship. It had the quality of fairyland architecture, a dream ship woven from the filaments of spiderwebs. But there was hidden strength, and truly functional design, as may be found in spiderwebs. Newlin was no engineer, but he sensed solidity and sound mathematics behind the toy structure's delicacy. The stair ladder supported him without vibration, without give or any feeling of insecurity. He climbed. Walls and the floor and ceiling bulkheads were rigid to his touch, supported his weight firmly, despite their eggshell-thin appearance of fragility. There were no corners; everything fused together seamlessly in smooth curves. Walls were selfluminous and oddly cool. The lower chambers were bare of all furnishing. Higher levels contained a hodge-podge of implements, all in the same light, strong formula of design. But none familiar, either as to material or their possible function. There were machines, but all too simple. Neither the bulk of atomic engines nor the intricate complexities inseparable from electric or combustion motors. Newlin was puzzled. He stopped to listen, feeling like an intruder into a strange world. The building, or spaceship, ached with silence. Another stairwell beckoned. He climbed, slowly, with increased caution. It would do no harm to have the gun in hand, ready. Where was the man who lived in such a place? And what sort of man could he be? What would he have in common with the frightened, haughty girl outside? The obvious explanation no longer satisfied. As Newlin ascended, another floor opened and widened to his vision. The stair-ladder ended here. It was the top floor. But this chamber seemed infinitely larger than the others. At first there was no sight of the man. Newlin stood alone in the center of a vast area. He did not seem indoors at all. Endless vistas extended to infinity in all directions. In all directions save one, in which stood a tall shadow. Newlin gasped. It was his shadow, detached, seemingly solid. Three-dimensional, it stood stock still. It moved when he moved. He gasped, then found the answer. By the shadow's echo of his movements, he could trace a vague outline of encirclement. The walls were a screen, a circle about the room upon which were cast pictures so perfect that the beholder had illusion of being surrounded by eery, exotic landscapes. The scenes were panoramic, all taken at the same angle, by the same camera, and so cunningly fused into a whole that the effect was beyond mere artifice. For a moment, Newlin had stood within the strange world, its crystalline forms and strange jeweled life as tri-dimensional and real as himself. It was a large screen, alive with light, alive with dancing, flickering figures. There was no visible projector, and the images were disturbingly solid and real. There was depth, without any perception of perspective. It was a reflection of reality, cast upon the plane of circling walls. Then a man stepped from the screen. He had been invisible, because the projected images had flowed and accommodated themselves to his metal-cloth smock. For the moment, he had been part of the screen. Newlin could not tear his eyes from that glaring plane of illusion. Something about the glare played havoc with nerves, and a faint hint of diabolical sound tortured his brain. No such world could exist in a sane universe. Not even with its terrible and heartbreakingly poignant beauty. It was a vision of Hell, bright with impossible octaves of light, splendid with raging infernos of blinding color, some of it beyond the visible range of human sight. And there was sound, pouring in maddening floods, sound in nerve-shattering symphonies like the tinkling clatter of many Chinese windbells of glass, all pouring out cascades of brittle, crystalline uproar. Sound and light rose in storming crescendos, beyond sight and beyond hearing. They ranged into madness. N ewlin screamed, tried to cover eyes and ears at once. He tried to run, but nerve-agony paralyzed movement. He was chained to the spot. Sound and color descended simultaneously into bearable range. He stared at the man he had come to see. He stared and the man stared back. "Genarion?" Newlin asked, his voice thin and vague among the tumultuous harmonies bursting from the screen. "Who are you that calls me by that name?" cried Genarion. He spoke in the same curious manner as the girl. He showed amazement. mixed with an ugly kind of terror. "You're not one of them!" "Them?" Newlin said, striving for sanity as sound and light swelled again. His brain reeled. "Songeen sent me -- !" Speech itself was a supreme effort. Genarion was beyond speech. Tigerishly, he moved. He leaped upon Newlin and thrust him back. Newlin sprawled painfully, his back arched and twisted by invisible machinery. Genarion stood with a gun in his hand. Aiming hastily, he pre.ssed trigger. The beam flashed and licked charred cloth and smoking leather from Newlin's sleeve. There was an odd jangle from the invisible machinery which gouged so tangibly into Newlin's body. Instinctively, Newlin fired. He did not bother to aim. For him, such a shot was point blank, impossible to miss. Genarion staggered. Part of his body vaporized and hung in dazzling mist as the projected images of light played over it. Dazed, Newlin scrambled to his feet. He was sick. But the screen held him. He stared, hypnotized. Images jigged and flowed in constant, eery rhythms. They moved and melted and rearranged themselves in altered patterns, without ever losing their identities or the illusion of solidity. The scene was not part of Venus, or of any world Newlin had seen. He had seen every planet or moon in the Solar system. But this was dififerent, alien, frightening. And the screen was not really a screen at all, for the body of Genarion, hideous in the distortion of death, lay halfway through its plane. And it was changing, subtly, as he watched. It was no longer even a man, totally unhuman, as alien as the world it lay partway in. The body flowed, molten, hideous. The screen was a surrealist painting, come alive, solid and real.,And the solid, physical body of Genarion was part of it. He was dead, but real. His alien form was a bridge between two worlds, and now dead, Genarion was alien to both of them. It was madness. The madness of the screen communicated itself to Newlin. Before his shocked eyes, Genarion's body began to steam and rise in a cloud of vaporous, glittering crystals. Swiftly the haze dissipated. It was gone, gone invisibly into the alien world. Whatever Newlin had killed, it was not human, not a man. Newlin turned and fled down the fairy stair-ladder. He went through the still-open airlock doors and out into the screaming night. Behind him alarms were ringing frantically. Now they would be ringing in the stations of the Protection Police and call orders would go out to the radio-equipped prowl cars. Police would converge swiftly. Sound shattered the night stillness. From far away, coming closer, was the shrill wail of a siren. Other sirens. There was a harsh bleat of police whistles, near at hand. Newlin's imagination quivered with the possibility of blaster beams thrusting at his back. He fled. The alarms had burst into sound too quickly. Had the girl set the police on him, waiting only long enough to make sure he would accomplish his mission? Whatever he had been set to kill, had not been human. Not a man. Intuitively, Newlin realized that the girl had anticipated everything. She knew what would happen, he reflected bitterly. She had promised payment only on delivery ' of a corpse, when there could be no corpse. Spud Newlin, Sucker No. #. Conscience did not trouble him. After all, the man -- or the thing -- had fired first, without warning, without waiting to hear him out. Without waiting for details like identity, or even asking to hear the message he brought. It was selfdefense, in a peculiar way. N ewlin ran and tried to lose himself in the shadowy fastness of Monta Park. He was not surprised that the girl had not troubled to wait and meet him. He was not even angry. It was part of the game. The Protection Police radios were carrying the alarm. Soon the Security Police would take up the hunt. If the girl had turned him in, she would be able to give a detailed and accurate description. Newlin guessed that he would be lucky to last even the few hours till daylight -- or what passes for daylight on cloud-shrouded Venus. Long before then, his career might end suddenly in a wild network of blaster or heat beams. By dawn he would very likely be crumpled among the ashcans and refuse in any dark alley. But still the city would be his best bet. No use beating his way to the spaceport landing stages. Space Patrol units must have been notified, and would already be searching all outgoing units. For the moment, he had a brief interval of grace in which to think things over and try, if only for his own satisfaction, to figure out what had happened. It -- whatever it was -- had writhed hideously when the blaster beam drove home. Part of it vaporized instantly, and the organs revealed did not even look animal. Eery, geometric, but riot the naked electronic symmetries of a mechanical robot. Not metal. But what? Collapsed like wet sacking, it had lain half-inside and half-outside the screen. He could not recall clearly its rapid mutations of form after that. Did it matter? The alarms were out. Blaring metallic clangor, and the uncanny banshee wailing of the hunting sirens. Police care little who is murdered in the nameless dives of Venusport, but let one of the lordly, rich men die, and all Hell is loosed on the killer. If the girl had turned in the alarm, it was only a matter of time. They would have his name and number; his ident-card would be listed and reproduced, sent everywhere. They would probably have the robot trackers out, those hideous electronic bloodhounds which can unerringly sort out a man's trail from the infinity of other scents and markings, following not smell, but a curious tangle of electrical impulses left by his body like static electricity or intangible magnetism. No layman could even guess how such a robot worked, but fugitives had learned to dread its infallible tracking ability. Newlin fled, and as he went, he cursed himself for getting involved in such a nightmare. Figures moved and blundered about him in the darkness of the park, but none got in his way. None seemed to notice him. Since it was not a man he had killed, perhaps others hunted him; other remote, alien beings he could nt)t see, or sense. The girl would know, of course. If he could find her. But she had vanished before he ever issued from the strange tower, and it was highly unlikely that he would ever see her again. Chance, and a sudden rush of blue-clad figures across a street ahead of him, turned Newlin back toward his own, famih'ar part of town. The scant shelter of shadows in deserted alleyways was a comfort, but little real protection. He had friends, of a peculiar sort, in the old native quarter, and the Spacebell lay just outside the fringe of the mutants' district, where the halfhuman natives laired up. These friends might hide him, for a while, although such refuge was of little use against the robot-trackers. By daylight, he could be smuggled outside the domed city, and once into the wastelands, there was a chance. Not a good one; but there, even the robot-tracker could hardly come upon him without his knowledge. A lucky blaster shot would leave a blank trail and a shattered robot for his pursuers to follow. He wondered if they would risk another such expensive machine merely to hunt down a murderer in the wastelands. Scarcely, when the wastelands would kill the fugitive sooner or later anyhow. His first task was to reach the Spacebell and collect his pay. Then to get protection-armor, against the peril of sandstorms and the radioactive sinks that spot the old sea-beds outside Venusport. After that, the native quarter, if he lived to reach it. Shortly before daylight, he turned the last alley-corner and came in sight of the Spacebell. A shadow stirred with movement. A lithe, loosely draped figure hurried to meet him. It was the girl- -- Songeen. "Don't go in there," she said. "They know who you are, and the police are waiting for you." Newlin felt numb all over. "How did they know? Did you tell them?" he snapped. "Of . course not. Don't be a fool. Would I inform, then wait to warn you? I did not know he had automatic alarms, and automatic cameras to make records of anyone who came into the -- the place. It was the pictures. They were identified with your ident-card at the Central Police Bureau. And the robot-trackers are out." N ewlin and Songeen studied each other for a long moment of silence. "I guess it doesn't matter now," Newlin said finally, "but I'm glad you didn't turn me in. I might almost as well give up and get the thing over with. There's no place to run. Not without money." Songeen produced a small sack of platinum coins which jingled as she offered it. "That's one reason I tried to find you. After the alarms, I knew I would only handicap your flight. I hid. Then I came here, because I thought you might come back. I'm sorry I have no more money, but the rest is all in credits. It would be no help to you in the wastelands." "I see," muttered Newlin. "Why did you care? Were you afraid I'd talk if the Police caught me?" Songeen shrugged coldly. "No, I hadn't thought of that. But I think I owe you something. Murderer's wages. I knew you couldn't fulfil your bargain when you made it. But, in a way, I am responsible for you." "In a way," agreed Newlin bitterly. He snatched at the bag of coins. "This will do. Thanks for nothing." "Don't blame me too much. I had no choice, and I did not know it would work out like this." "Perhaps not, but next time do your victims." Songeen was crying, tearless wracking sobs that shook her frail body. "I'm sorry," she moaned. "But I couldn't even get in to see him. He knew the exact vibration level of my body, and had set supersonic traps to kill me if I tried to enter. Even my bones would have shattered. I would have died painfully and horribly. I would rather have died myself than cause his death. Believe that. There is always a third victim. He was my husband, and I loved him. You can't understand, of course -- " "I understand less than ever now." Newlin knew that it was madness to remain so close to the Spacebell. But he could not force himself to leave Songeen. She seemed near collapse. A thought struck him. "Say, is there anything there to tie you up with this business?" Songeen gave a wry thrust of her thin shoulders. "Much -- but does it matter? It was my -- our home. Before he tricked me outside and would not let me return. They don't know what happened -- yet. But there will be enough evidence against both of us. Part of what you saw was illusion. His body is still there. Changed -- but the trackers can identify it. The charge is murder, and they will want both of us. Not just you." "Come with me." Newlin spoke harshly -- sharply. The girl's eyes flickered. "Are you threatening me?" "No. It's just that I've led them to you. We're in the same boat now. With the mechanical hounds on our heels. They will connect you through me, now that our trails have crossed. And they'll follow both of us. How will you manage?" Songeen smiled wearily. "One always takes risks. Icame here prepared for -- anything."  "Don't be a fool! Protection Police don't stop to ask questions. They're hired Killers." "I suppose not. What do you suggest?" ' "Run and hide. Come with me, if you like. But suit yourself. I'm getting out of here. Out into the wastelands. It's almost dawn now. In the city, we're lost. Outside, there's a chance. A poor one, but -- " Light was that gray ugliness that precedes the smeary glare of dawn on Venus. The girl seemed very slight and young and helpless. Again, Newlin felt that impulse to save and protect her. He could see no details of feature, even her face was shadowed, and not quite human; but her body was beautiful, and trembling. "Are you coming?" he asked, savagely. "I'll go with you," she said. "You're kind. Perhaps I can help you. If they corner us, please kill me. I don't like -- being hurt." Newlin laughed grimly. "It's a promise. But I'll kill some of them, first." -- not for me." wastelands. Spud Newlin called a halt. The girl had trudged wearily behind him, uncomplaining and with patient determination. They wasted no precious breath in words, and walking had been doubly diffi-; cult for her. The protection armor was twice too large, and very cumbersome for such a slight figure ; but such garments never come in halfsize. Children and women are forbidden to venture into the wastelands, except in special vehicles. Actually they had started out by vehicle. But it was old, cranky and ready for the junkyard. In the first flurry of sandstorm, it had clogged, burned out and died. Nothing very reliable was available in the black market without more notice. , Newlin accepted the inevitable and proceeded on foot. Perhaps they could reach the Archaeological Station at Sansurra. He was not certain if it would be inhabited at the Sandstorm season, but there was a good chance of stored food and water. Turning back to Venusport was impossible. So they went on. Now he was confused. Directions are difRcult at best on Venus, and his radio-compass proved faulty. He had only the vaguest idea where they were, and none at all where they were headed. But if he stopped too long, the shifting dunes would cover them. And if they tried to go too fast,it would be fatally easy to blunder into one of the open sinkholes of molten, radioactive metal. He stopped and motioned the girl to rest. She sank down, exhausted. Newlin adjusted the throat microphones and headsets in their plastic helmets to make for easier conversation. But for a while, neither could talk. They sat and gasped, yearning for a breath of fresh, unreclaimed air. Water supplies were low, and already Newlin had established iron rations. Drinking by tubes was difficult in the helmets and the water was warm and foul. "You're lost?" Songeen asked at last. Newlin nodded. He produced a wrinkled, battered map. "I can't even trust the compass. I don't  know where we are." The girl took the map in her gloved hands and peered intently through her face-mask. One finger traced a tiny circle in the film of dust. "I know," she said. "We are somewhere about here. And over there -- " she indicated a direction behind Newlin -- "is the city from which my people came." Newlin was startled. The directional instinct with which all Venusians are endowed was familiar enough, yet he would have sworn the girl was not from the enfeebled and mutant races of the veiled planet. She was, at once, more human -- and more remote. Songeen guessed his doubt. Through the fused quartz faceplate, her angular features wore a curious, faint smile. "No, not Venusian. This was an -- an outpost. A colony and a quarantine station. The city was abandoned long ago. Long before the atomic holocaust my people fled. Eons have passed. Everything is now in ruins -- if even ruins remain. See, it is not marked on the map. Not even as ruins. But we have unusual race-memory. I can see the fabulous towers and arsenals, the terraced gardens afid the palaces -- as if they still stood today as they were in that vanished yesterday. And we have the homing instinct. It was my people who gave it to the Venusians. The one thing of value that still remains to them." Newlin was still dubious. "Unless you're dreaming." Her linger jabbed at the map. "We are here," she insisted. "And if you care to search and dig, the city is probably still there, as it was a "Would there be water in your ruined city?" Newlin asked. "Who knows? The wells are probably all filled with sand now. Or gone dry, or become contaminated. There is always much radioactivity near the ruined cities. They were primary targets when the peoples of Venus destroyed themselves. Even this desert is mute evidence of the holocaust; if one needs evidence. My people fled before that madness, because they anticipated it." Newlin snorted. The pre-holocaust Venusians were purely legendary. No written records could exist, amid such conditions as must have followed the ancient wars. Science years had passed since Venus was a fair green planet peopled with hearty, beautiful, ease-loving races. face people had even looked upon the sun. "If you're right about where we are," Newlin growled, "I'm still interested in that city. We can never make Sansurra with the water we have. Ruined or not, there may be wells. Is there a chance?" "Not a good one," Songeen replied. "But'better than none." "Whenever you're ready," Newlin said. "You lead." Wearily, man and girl struck off across the seas of shifting sand. Great dunes blocked their way. Some they circled, others must be climbed laboriously. F rom the top of a huge, windribbed billow, Newlin stared at a pale flickering in the dust ahead. In all other directions stretched endless humps and hollows. But before him lay a great wind-scoured hollow of bare rock. Beyond that, crowning a series of low hills, which must have thrust above water line in this shallow part of the ancient, .vanished sea, were ruins. Even as ruins,, the city was spectacular. Massive columns had eroded slowly into stone toothpicks. Walls crumbled into formless heaps resembling the dunes. A few outlines of smoothed blocks and shattered lintels huddled the ground, half hidden by the encroaching sand. Details had vanished eons ago, but something still remained to tantalize imagination. The few buildings that still stood, and the soaring, fragile towers evidenced an engineering civilization of staggering proportions. Surface dimensions were still tremendous, and the city itself must have been of first importance, covering hundreds of square miles. "Our city," said Songeen. Newlin glanced quickly behind. Still distant, but moving very rapidly was the string of dark objects that could only be sandsleds of the pursuit. One tiny figure, scarcely visible, was far in advance of the others. The robot tracker. He gestured. "They're covering three miles to our one," he told her grimly. "We'll try to reach the city before they catch up with us. Perhaps we can hide out among the ruins, and -- with luck, booby-trap the tracker. If there's water, we can hold out for quite a while." Songeen nodded crisply. Her voice was strained with emotion and fatigue. "As fugitives my people abandoned this city. Now, as a fugitive, I return." Then she was off, running awkwardly, the cumbersome suiting of her protection armor giving her bounding strides the laughable appearance of a lumbering teddy-bear. Descent into the hollow was riding a series of miniature sand avalanches. Each step buried the foot deep, but the sand gave way and slipped in loose spills. His bodts struck hard on rough, bare rock. He grunted, fought for balance, then sprawled heavily. She helped him up, then took off again. Newlin followed. Over the wind-carved rock, they made good time. Ascent of the long, jagged slopes to the city was hearterous. The surface was like sponge-glass, brittle and deadly with knife-edges when broken. Sheltering from wind-driven sand under the cover of a great monolith, Newlin and Songeen watched the racing figures of pursuit top the crest of the opposite ridge and start down. Man and girl were too winded and weak even to get up. They dared rest only a moment, then plunged on into the maze of tumbled ruins. Ultimate exertion had taken toll of their energies and rapidly burned up air reserves. Both were cruelly thirsty. The heat, even inside their insulated suits, was stifling. There was no time to take stock of manifold discomforts. The race was neck and neck. Death sniffed at their heels in the guise of mechanical trackers. On Venus, life is to the swift and cunning. To Newlin, life was perilous, but sweet. Their helmet microphones picked up and amplified a curious droning buzz.' It was the deathsong of the electronic tracker and it seemed closer than it was. Slowly, inexorably, it grew louder. Sound swelled steadily, and it was a whiplash to their flagging energies. They fled in panic through the streets of the dead city. It was no real refuge to them, but its megalithic precincts gave some lying illusion of safety. They chose a twisting, tangled route into the very heart of the ruined city, with the instinct of a hunted animal to confuse its trail. They doubled back to cross their own trail twice, in the vain hope of baffling the electronic enemy. Newlin had been hunted before, on Mars, but by live bloodhounds. Pepper, oil of mustard, and perfumes had saved him then. But this hound followed not scent, but something intangible, electrical,and as mysterious as the soul-aura itself. It sorted two life-complexes from all other impulses and followed its own prime-directive -- hunt down and kill. The end was inevitable as death. N ewlin laid ambush for the mechanical monster. Crouched in a nest of rubble, he waited for it, blaster gun ready. Around a corner of shattered stones, it appeared. It moved like a whipping shadow, like part of the gathering twilight. Silent, save for the high, nervetearing drone, it came warily across the courtyard paved with eroded stone. It was low, not animal in appearance, with the form of a fat, ugly snake. Fading light of the Venusian day cast a glint of metallic gray from its scaling of interlocked rings. Newlin waited for a close shot. How vulnerable was such a soulless, mechanical monster to even the shattering-heat-forces of a blaster gun? Songeen lay quietly beside him, her body quivering as much from strained muscles as from fear. Behind the face-mask, her thin features were pale, ghostlike. With elaborate caution, the tracker circled their hiding place. Its froglike head, with a ruff of exposed filaments lifted, like an animal scenting blood. It edged slowly closer, its movement a glide, sinuous, crafty, with no suggestion of mechanical action. Newlin pushed the girl's form roughly away, lest her trembling foul his aim. Sighting, he pressed trigger. Bright flame leaped from the weapon, crackling. The beam lashed at the tracker, which stopped suddenly, threw back its monstrous head, and burst into hideous uproar of sparking, electrical discharge. Like a live thing, it twitched, jerked, and flung itself in mad spasms. Convulsions stopped as short-circuits flared in both head and body. Molten, flowing, its metallic carcass glowed eerily in the dimness. Dying, it blazed up in a fireworks display' spectacular enough to attract half of Venus to the terrified fugitives. But the drone continued. From behind the same comer came a duplicate of the first metal monster. Another tracker. Its drone rose into shrill crescendo. Like a dog, it approached the wreckage of its fellow. And like a dog, it summoned help. Then, without pausing to examine the mechanical casualty, it turned its electronic attentions back to the hunted. Hopelessly, Newlin urged Songeen to her feet. They fled, and the game began all over again. perate flight, the haunted ruins of an unknown city, deadly pursuit closing in, slowly, patiently inevitably. The familiar hare and hounds pattern of nightmare. They fled through vague, littered streets, treacherous with the rubble of lost centuries. Buildings were lighter patterns upon the gathering darkness. Stone flagging underfoot was rough, eroded, rotten. A pinnacled precipice rose suddenly to bar their way. Immense, sheer, buttressed by spills of loose rock, it towered above them and lost its heights in gloom. Within a massive, deep-carved archway of stone, set an oval of polished red granite. A doorway, barren of carving save for one, scrawled and monstrous hieroglyph. Uneasiness stirred in Newlin, for something in his buried race-memories recalled that symbol with supernal dread. Ice formed about his spine and melted in trickling terror-drops. Instinct cringed, but his conscious mind rebelled at even the effort of memory. Songeen stopped and stared at the hideously marked doorway, as if tranced. "I remember this place," she said in swift excitement. "But I had thought it vanished -- eons ago." Newlin swerved on her angrily. "This is no time for experiments with your subconscious," he growled, savage with strain. "It is -- sanctuary," she replied softly. "Come!" Boldly she stood before the oval door. Her finger traced its complex symbol, and the symbol responded with a glow like moonfire. Again, as it had been with that oval door in Monta Park, there was baffling suggestion of unmechanical movement. The stone block did not slide, roll, or swing open. It gave a slight quiver and dissolved. Songeen stepped through its aperture and the inner darkness of the building claimed her. Reluctantly, Newlin followed -- caught as much by curiosity as driven by the yelping spectres of pursuit. No light entered the building from any source. It was dark as the pits of Ganymede or the under-surface laboratories of Pluto. It was dense and tangible as a block of black crystal. Newlin could see nothing, not even Songeen. And there was an alien feel to the interior. He was aware that Songeen operated some hidden mechanism, and that the door, though he could not see it, was replaced. "Now, for the moment, we are safe," she said slowly. "They cannot enter here." Newlin shrugged bitterly. "It's all one. They can't enter and we don't dare go out. So we stay here and die of thirst. If you were really a toprung witch, you'd think of details like air, food and water." Songeen's laugh was a ripple of eery crystal in the darkness. "How did you guess I was a witch?" she asked whimsically. "But we need not die here. Not unless you prefer to die among surroundings familiar to you. There is another way out. If we dare take it. For me, it will be simple. For you -- " "Not so simple, eh? You paint an interesting picture. Like one I once saw on Mars, in the Gneiss Gallery. 'Nocturne -- yenusport,' it was titled. Beautiful. Dark purple background, the city seemed like fountains of flowering stars. It's not like that, not from the places I've seen it. Filth and dirt, people dying from poverty, disease or violence. Just a comparison. How close docs your picture match the reality?" "Close enough. You're a strange man, full of contradictions. I think you're only slightly mad. But for anyone, the way I could take you would be difficult. The pathway leads to my own world. To you -- or anyone, not native -- it will seem madness. Something of it you saw in the tower." Around him in the darkness, he was conscious of her swift movements. She seemed untroubled by the lack of light. Neither by vision or hearing could he distinguish anything, but he sensed activity. Then, suddenly, as if she had uncovered a cache of implements and struck a fire, radiance spread around her. Its source was not definite, and it spread slowly, like a stain through water. But something illuminated a vast, vaulted interior, Gothic in a sense, with a churchlike air of gloom and mystery. It was Gothic, but of spiderweb delicacy soaring arches, vague fretted ceilings, walls intricately carved into lacework of stone. Everywhere were echoes of that same eery symbolism in the door hieroglyph, and Newlin's folk-memories were oddly disturbed. H e could not place the feeling. Certainly none of the symbols bore even slight resemblance to any written language known to him. Something about their intricacy clouded even clear perception, and the emotional effect was not religious in any sense -- it was stark, abysmal fear, as if the mysteries behind such symbols were too great for humanity to bear. Ignoring him, Songeen persisted at her curious tasks. Newlin went and stood beside her, watching. With gloved hand, she appeared to be tracing out some maze of deep cut markings that figured what must have been an altar-fane. "Do you expect any results from this ritual mumbo-jumbo?" he questioned irritably. Songeen looked up, startled. "Not more ritual than any other mathematics," she chided. "This is no temple, as you seem to imagine. It is the old quarantine station. I seek a doorway, but not into a hidden passage. There are other doorways. This one leads between dimensions. My world exists in a different plane.At least, our pathway to it follows strange ways, that you could never understand. You are no scientist or scholar. How could you grasp such unknown and forgotten matters? How could anyone in your world?" Newlin stared at her, seeing things he had only guessed before. "You are -- alien," he said. "You can'Cguess how alien," she answered. "I said I was not of Venusian stock. My people came from outside. Our world exists in the same plane as yours, a planet circling one of the nearer stars. This place was never our home, but we had colonies on Venus, Earth, Mars and one of Jupiter's moons. Other colonies -- like this one -- and observatories and quarantine stations. Our scientific observers and the medical staff stayed here. They studied and recorded and treated. "We were nqt gods nor demons nor anything else supernatural. Just a people not human, but not too remote from humanity. Just emissaries and workers, students and doctors. You might call us elder brothers to the human race. We came not to conquer, enslave and exploit, but to help. Sometimes the Masters came with us, sjnce they were interested in our work. "Many times, by our guidance, human beings reached high levels of development in the arts and sciences. We taught them and guided their stumbling steps, and released to them such knowledge as we dared trust to them. Time and again, we raiised them from the slime, only to have them fall back. There is fatal disease in the race, a disease of instability and cruelty and violence. Call it madness -- insanity -- in the technical sense. It is pathological, and the disease is common to the human race, in all its ramifications. The Solar System is mad, and all who dwell in it are lunatics. Dangerous ahd homicidal lunatics. Sol's system is the asylum and pesthouse of oui galaxy. We -- my people -- are its keepers and doctors. "We are charged with the care and treatment of an ailing form of life. Because of our near likeness, in form and thought, it was hoped that we could understand and help them ; in time, perhaps, find a cure. There are other races inhabiting the galaxy -- many of them, civilized, intelligent, living, and sometimes even of matter similar to ours. Their minds and bodies are too different. We are nearest, both in form and feeling. "We have tried, patieptly and hopefully. For the mo.st part, it is a long history of frustration and failure. The corruption is too deep, too basic. It is part of the life-pattern of the race. Some individuals may rise above it, but its taint lies dormant even in them. At best, they are carriers. And there seems little future for such a race. "Your galactic neighbprs have been patient. But now a time of decision is near. Your ships explore, exploit at will within your system. You have pushed your limits to the furthest expansion of that system. Colonized and despoiled. Now, you stand at the expanding horizon of stellar flight. Other star-systems tempt your imaginations, and technology batters at the problems involved. "Your neighbors are watching, and afraid. If your people burst outside the limits of Sol's system, the contagion of your madness will spread and engulf the galaxy. At our request, they have given time, granting extensions freely. For countless centuries we have tried. and our effort, all our work and thought, has led only to failure. Now, the others have set a time limit, and the deadline is very close. Very close. You are all living on borrowed time; and but for our pleadings, it would be still less. "The masters often send emissaries to us, as we send ours to the planets of Sol. They help and advise us -- not as superior beings or as gods, commanding -- but as elder brothers, trying to share their wisdom, trying tq help and guide us. They only help and advise, never intervene unless asked. Their advice is wisdom -- sometimes terrible, difficult to understand, painful to accept. Recently, they brought a message from the other peoples -- a message and ultimatum. And the Masters advised us to accept failure, to let them destroy humanity as a blot on the galaxy. We begged one more chance, a last, desperate gamble, probably foredoomed to failure. But they granted us the painful right of the doctor. We can operate, but if the patient dies, so do we. That was our choice." gaged herself busily with the queerly formal operations of tracing the intricate diagrams. "Do you believe me?" she asked, looking up. "Fm not sure," Newlin replied frankly. "Are these Masters your gods?" "Not gods. Living, intelligent beings, civilized, but not like us. Not material. I cannot explain. Even they are but advisers and messengers. Not all-wise, nor all-powerful. I wish they were; for they are kind," "You sound like nice people," Newlin admitted. "I wish I could believe you. Off-hand, I think you're crazy. You say we're all off the beam. Then you talk like delusions of grandeur, and I have reason to know you can be homicidal. One of us is nuts. It's a toss-up." Songeen smiled wearily. "It is possible that I am infected. I am inoculated against it, but so was Genarion. Will you believe that I loved him? He was my husband. We were children together, like brother and sister. Later, we were schooled together, were married, and asked to be assigned our task  together. I did not sentence him, and I would have died myself first. But he had been here too long. If he had gone back, the contagion would have gone with him. It was fated. You and I were mere tools. Weapons." "I'm sorry, Songeen. I do believe you loved him." She shobk her head in curious ruffle of emotion. "He was not the first. Many of our kind have renounced their birthright to go among your people, become like you and share your hideous lives. They are part of your great religions, part of the legendary history of your races.'w Silence fell between them. Newlin thought of dying Mars, the burnt-out husk of Venus, the political and economic pesthole of Earth -- even the grim, gray, terrible frontiers on the further planets and moons. His recollections were a dreadful pageant of spectres, of an ugly, terror-haunted childhood, of the bleak years of his barren, lonely wanderings -- the memory kitbag of a homeless, and often hunted, spacebum. "I can believe you," Newlin admitted slowly. "Most of the truly worthwhile leaders of mankind startd so far above the mob that they seem cast in a different mold. The real leaders -- not politicians, nor military brass. The thinkers and scientists, even the prophets. Every great religion sprang from the vision or inspiration of a single leader. Beyond the chaff, the fragments of his actual thoughts and words -- always sound good. But their followers don't follow them." Songeen's face twisted in bitter wrath. "How terribly true! Can blind men follow the sun? They feel its warmth and reach out to it. but they stumble and fall on their own clay feet. Blind eyes and hands can never reach the light. Most of our emissaries, of that lund, die horribly, and their message is distorted to serve the ends of madness and corruption." "Is there no hope for us?" She stared at him. The pale glow of her moonbright eyes softened and intensified. "One hope, and only In yourselves. We have tried and failed. If you feel so strongly, why have you done nothing?" Bitter hatred snagged in Newlin's throat, making his laugh a sound of horror. "Not me. I can pity the masses of poor and downtrodden, but only as masses. As abstractions. Individually, I loathe them. Cornered rats will fight back -- but men lick the boots of their tormentors. I learned only hate and defiance. I'm a cornered rat, not a man." There was sound now, outside the door they had entered. Low at first, a mere scrabbling, as if the trackers had located their refuge. In moments only, there came a heavy pounding, followed by the skirl of atomic drills. Newlin tensed, his hand itching at the butt of his blaster. "I'm a rat," he went on. "Cornered, like any other rat. And the terriers are out there scratching at my hole. If you'll open that nonsqueak door, I'll talk to them. Maybe even kill a few." "No," said Songeen positively. "But I'm a killer," Newlin insisted. "I've killed men before for a lot less reason. They're mining the door. How long do you think that will last against explosives?" "Not long," the girl admitted. "But long enough. I have the key at last. Stand back." ly radiant hovered indescribably in space. Suspended above the worn flooring, without visible support or tangible outline -- it existed. Something like weird emptiness, a void appearing in the air itself. "This is the portal," Songeen told him calmly. "Choose now. I will take you with me if I can without permission. But do not come with me, unwarned. There is grave peril, beyond anything I can describe to you. Beyond your experience or imagination. I will try to gej you safely back, somehow. But I can promise nothing. And if you stay too long, there is no coming back. You must remain there; even if the terror of your surroundings kills you." She stood beside the mysterious doorway, waiting. Newlin made a start to follow her, then balked. "Wait!" he ordered roughly, as she was about to lead the way. "I Oan't go with you -- not like this." "Afraid?" "Yes, but not of you or your world. I trust you. But you say everyone here is crazy. That it's infectious. Won't I carry the contagion into your world ?" Songeen hesitated. Shadows deepened inside her eyes. "You would, yes. But you will have contact with no one but me. Perhaps with the Masters -- if I can take you to them; They may help us, but they are strange, unpredictable. Remember, I promise nothing and you  come at your own risk. But your disea.se will harm no one -- I'm inoculated, and the Masters are immune. If you overstay the limit and cannot return, you will be decontaminated just as ye must be when ve return to our own people. "Here, in this room, is the place where the people of our colony on Venus were decontaminated before they could be allowed to enter the place of refuge the Masters had prepared for them. It Is a cruel and harrowing experience. I know. There may be a way to get you safely back, without that. But your mind could never stand the shock. Understand that, before you choose." "If it won't harm you, I'll go along," Newlin decided. "Almost any world would be an improvement on this." "Don't be too sure," she warned. "At worst, tlje terror here Is familiar. Come, then. Hold my hand, stay close, and try not to be frightened. It will be bad enough. And try not to change too much, or I will have difficulty returning you alive." The portal swallowed her, and Newlin felt himself drawn into the force-vortex, still clinging to her hand. T ransition was miid enough, less shock than he had expected. A moment of chill detachment, as if something indescribably cold shattered his body into component atoms and readjusted them to new patterns. He gasped, his body making the same thermal changes as if he stood under a cold shower. He shivered. Then it was like coming out of the blanketing fog of horror into the sunlight of sanity; like rebirth, painlessly, into an eery other-dimension. There was light and sound about him, a stir of cool air, Songeen had become separated from him in that moment of strange passage. She stood apart, watching him with laughter in her eyes. Laughter as cool and calm and soothing as the soft wind that riffled her hair. She had stripped off the bulky armor, shed her plastic helmet. Now she was all woman again, and somehow, oddly, a symbol of all women. Other senses than his five sprang into life within him. Weird awareness through new perceptions which were  nameless to his mind or to his memory. At first there was no terror, no surprise. Merely an overwhelming difference. Overhead was starless night, but not darkness. It was a vaulted, infinite sky, like an inverted ocean of tinted crystal, transparent, but softly colored, deepening imperceptibly to a heart of emerald, a-glow with faintest witchlights. All around him was a maze of shimmering crystal in odd forms, grotesque, clear but echoing the witchlights of that haunted sky. Wind-borne, came the faint, sweet chiming of distinct porcelain bells. The place was alive with movement, sensed but incompletely seen. Even the wind flowed in almost visible currents, thickened as if the air had become dense, molten glass. All forms in the maze of crystal varied constantly. Light flared and died in odd rhythms, and the almost visible winds played icy arpeggios upon strings of spun glass, like Aeolian harps. Showering notes like those of Chinese windbells hung in clusters in the eddies of great wind rivers, and both sound and light flowed together and wove strange patterns and infinite variations. It was not quite pleasant, vaguely nervetightening, but highly stimulating. Sound was muted at first, as was the light. Images blurred and outlines were unsteady, baffling. Everything fused and flowed together like half molten shards of broken glass. Wavelengths of troubled sound formed trembling notes that hung in the air, almost visible, crystalline and somehow painfully dissonant. Like Songeen, her world or the pathway to it was strange, alien, but poignantly beautiful. It was stranger than he thought. He realized almost at once that his mind was making adjustments. It was lying to him, translating unfamiliar concepts into terms known to memory. It was diluting and enfeebling his sensations. But dread grew in him. When his mind tired, stopped lying to him, what would it really be like? Could he stand the factual perception? They trod the forest aisles of crystalline forms. There was light, of odd, gray, glary kind. A twilight, silvery, unreal as the trans-Lunar dreams of drugged poets. Songeen moved ahead slowly, making no effort to regain her clasp of his hand. Almost she seemed to avoid him, waiting until he almost overtook her, then skimming lightly away from him. Her slim, pale witchery was both taunt and challenge. She appeared to float rather than walk. One by one she dropped her clinging robes. She became part of the mad forest, part of its dreamy gray enchantments. Light grew steadily, and with it came more color, more magic, and more confusion of senses. The forest-forms assumed strange geometries. They stretched about him in endless vistas, blurring and transmuting as he watched. The dreamlike cloudiness was fading from his perceptions. He caught dreadful hints now and then of new, unheard-of forms and colors, of unstable geometries as far beyond Einstein's as his were beyond Euclid's. Nothing was tangible or definite. and perhaps that was the secret. Nothing ever is. Fear wove a crystalline web about Newlin's throat, strangling. He halted and took stock. Ahead, Songeen waited, watching him, her figure a pale, elfin flame form against the shadowy mass of colored crystals. It was a forest of gemfires, and she was the purest jewel of the forest. Naked, alien, but -- mind balked at backtracking. There was no going back. Perhaps he had already come too far. Was Songeen a vampire luring him into the hideous depths of this unknown place? He had been here before. It was like that awful illusion in the tower, but muted. How much did he perceive? How much was sheerest self-deception? Was he mad in the midst of awful sanity, or sane in the ultimate horror of lunacy? Her voice floated back to him, its sound the chiming crash of splintering glass. "Try not to change too much," she warned. "Change?" Even the word sounded strange to him, as she said it. He felt a swift surge of anger. There was no change in him -- none! The tinkling bell-tones matched the swirl of his emotion and rose to jangling, tormented heights. It was shrill, maniacal tumult, that ranged upward and upward into octaves beyond sound. It was a rollicking, tortured insanity. Windbells chiming, jangled; tinkling, shimmering, exploding inside his brain. Windbells shattering in a hurricane of sound and ecstasy. With his fists, Newlin pounded at his bursting skull. Pain deadened perception, gave him a moment's relief. He was not changing, he shouted in loud defense. He was not! Songeen poised, watching. Her body-outlines swirled and altered in swift mutations before his eyes. She was not woman now. Not even human. She danced and flickered and gibbered at him. She was jeweled movement. Change. She was as crystalline as the forest, as molten emerald as the sky. Points of fire inside her. caught and flared and burned inside his eyes. She was not Songeen I Newlin screamed. He looked down at his hands. He screamed again, louder. His hands were transparent as glass, and as fluid as water. Outlines wavered, changed. "Try not to change too much," Songeen pleaded. But her voice joined the clattering crystalline tumul which raged about him. He was cracking. He could feel the seams in his mind giving way. Like a great, floundering beast, he charged toward her. Forms of brittle crystal shattered at his touch. Shattered into sound and pain. The forest-forms changed color, echoing his violence. New vortices of movement, converged upon him. Perceptions expanded and radiance showered about him, through him. The hovering, dancing crystal notes were now visible. Beads of light, dripping from a sky of light. They were sound a color, bright, bursting bubbles of sound. Their rhythmic tempos increased, murmur swelled into insistent roaring and the jangling of insane dissonance. Vitreous grotesques shimmered like a forest of aspens quivering in wind and sunlight. Glassy fragments of splintered sound poured in floods from sky and ground. Trampled grass gave way under his feet in brittle crunching, and the brush shivered at his touch, dissolving into chill slivers of slashing sound. Blood was dripping. The forest changed color, as if crimson stain spread through it. Hellish glare was a roaring torrent of musical color. Red stains spread swiftly, dying the crystal columns, the glassy sward, seeping into the reeling brain. There was blood. The taste of it in his mouth, the hot, salt smell, the sound of its dripping. He swam in seas of ruby light, crashing and plunging wildly, sinking into its crimson depths. Red light thickened around him, deepened, smothering. The darkness was red, fire-shot, roaring... Then pain and timeless darkness. Newlin awakened slowly, to ugly tension in his mind. Shadows like beating wings disturbed his memory. The churning light and sound were gone. He drifted idly, body and mind coming softly to rest upon a bank of soft grass. Someone knelt beside him. Someone cried softly, to the same murmurous rhythms of the crystalline forest. Without opening his eyes he sensed this, and knew also that he was still within the eery precincts of the maze. He opened his eyes, painfully.  , This time, there were tears, glistening and falling slowly, glistening like crystal dewdrops in sunlight, and falling in softly tinkling shower like spilled jewels. "Songeen!" he cried. "Yes," murmured a tympany of glass bells, "I am here." It was Songeen -- almost, again, as he remembered her, almost human. It was Songeen, small, delicate, unreal, but sweetly feminine -- almost human. It was Songeen, but with something added, changed, oddly blended into both form and personality. "I tried to save you," she murmured. "I tried, but could not reach you. My knowledge is incomplete. I thought you were weak, confused, too frightened and disturbed to be changed easily. But ou were strong, and your violence was a challenge to it. Only the Masters could understand. They saved you -- not I. They intervened in time." "The Masters!" Newlin glanced round, quickly, warily. "They are here?" "Not here -- now. But they saved you. I did not know all the dangers. They -- not I -- " "Saved me from whafr -- death?" "No -- worse. And now they say you must go back. At once. The Masters urge haste." N ewlin tasted bitterness on his lips. "Orders from headquarters. Well, I've been kicked out of better places -- but few more interesting. Too bad I forgot my brass knuckles." Physically, he tried to rise. Every bone and muscle ached. But it could have been worse. He seemed intact. Hints of vagrant color rippled over his visible skin, but he sensed neither pain nor menace from them. Songeen bent over him. Her arm supported him in sitting position. It was unnecessary, but the sensation of contact was pleasant. He yielded to her ministrations and looked about. It was still the forest, crystalline, murmurous -- but now muted. The same glary, unpleasant light beat down from the same impossible sky. Storming, eery colors flowed infinite mutations of form through the crystal spectres of the maze. And the tinkle of myriad glass wind bells held a maddening overtone. He had thought, somehow, that it would be different. That it would have changed, subtly, as had Songeen. But from a brief survey, nothing had changed. The tumult had faded, become bearable -- but identity remained. Disappointed, he rose slowly, and felt her strong arm clasp about him. He felt clumsy, off-balance, but not weak. If anything, he was stronger. Stronger, and more cleanly, clearly alive than he had felt before. "Come," urged Songeen. "I will take you hack to tbe portal." "Back -- to that?" Newlin struggled with the futility of words. He was not sure what he wanted, let alone what he wanted to say. That insinuating crystalline clatter got inside his hrain, scattered thought. Songeen caught a stirring of rebellion in him and sensed his mental confusion. "Don't fear the hunters," she said. "There are other doorways, and you can issue onto some other planet, if you wish. Try not to think, or even feel." Her voice penetrated the uproar blanketing other sounds. For seconds, it seemed to elevate him to some remote, lofty plane wherelife was serene, uncomplicated. Detached, he drifted with his own alien thoughts. Through senses other than visual, ke watched his stumbling progress at her side as the girl threaded a pathway through the maze. Through senses not normally his own, he was aware of the utter strangeness behind this forest and its crystalline mysteries. He recognized the girl as part of the strangeness. Dimly, he sensed some cosmic reluctance in himself, and was disturbed by his trend of thought. Faintly, he was aware of bodily movement and the crowding feel of shadowy aisles about him. But he was more aware of the girl, of her physical presence, and of the unrest she inspired in him. Songeen! He had known many women on many, strange worlds. But none like this, ncHie ever so strange, so wonderful, so terrifying. He had wanted her, yes. But only for an hour of passion, at first. An hour of the blinding futility of trying, in her arms, to forget the crowding ugliness of 'life. He had not cared if the women he knew had souls, or if he had. Souls were unfamiliar, vague, and he would not have known one if he encountered it. Soft, white bodies, glowing like pale witchlights in the darkness. Yes, he had known many such. He had known many women, loved none. Newlin had not spoken, not in words. But Songeen heard, by some subtle sense that was part of this abnormal forest. Her laugh was a soft tinkle of breaking glass. She did not speak aloud, but word-symbols of thought poured from her mind. Newlin was aware of them, springing suddenly into his own brain, but he knew they came from her. "Many women, yes. But none like me. If you loved me, it would not be for this body. It is not what you think. I hold this substance, this form, only by power of will. It is mine only for a short while more. My flesh is not like yours, subject to different laws of form and movement." N ewlin answered her, but now in words. His voice sounded like a note of strained sanity in such a place of nightmare. "I never learned love in the sense you mean," he said. "Nor had I thought of you again, in that way -- after Monta Park. You were too alien for me. I understood that. Too alien for any kind of love I knew. You were -- repulsive." In silence, then, thoughts blocked out, Songeen guided Newlin. She seemed aloof, withdrawn. They filed slowly amid towering masses of smoky crystal. She led, drifting like a smoke wraith, before him. Newlin picked a cautious pathway over treacherous, unstable footing. He followed, bemused, and reluctance grew into agony of mind. What was wrong with him? He grappled with himself, and strains grew into open rebellion. What did he want? Near the portal, sensing it or another like it, he balked. "Songeen!" At his call, she glided hack, phantomlike. "Yes?" "You're in trouble here, aren't you? Because of bringing me?" Shoulders as translucent as thin ivory shrugged. "No matter." "But you are?" Newlin insisted, as if it mattered suddenly to him. "Yes," she granted softly. "But do not alarm yourself. Only misunderstanding. I will explain my motives. They will point out my error. There is no punishment here." "You're not telling everything. What is wrong?" Her moonfire eyes were troubled. "Nothing you can help." Newlin probed mercilessly. "Tell me. Why did you bring me here? It was not only to save me from the hunters. Even I guessed that. Why?" Poised, slender, defiant as a sword, Songeen met and parried his attack. "I cannot tell you that." Newlin took her rebuff gracelessly. He was a son of Chaos, a man of the brawling, violent Solar breeds. His temper was short, his words and actions direct. He saw challenge and answered in kind. "Then take me to the Masters." Fear and fury blazed in her eyes. "They have not sent for you. I cannot take you to them like this. You are mad. You will live to regret this. Why, why?" "I'll tell you. You said I could be decontaminated. You said I could be cured, that I could stay here -- aftei;wards. I want to stay now. Is there a way. Can I be cured?" "Of the madness, yes. But it is a fearful way. Do you know how all lunatics are treated? How they are cured, if at all? In your own asylums, do you know how madness is treated?" "Yes, I know," Newlin answered roughly. "By shock treatment. I suspected something of the sort, all the time. Am I right? Is your treatment similar?" Songeen nodded, her movement a shimmering echo of the forest's mirrored quivering. "Similar -- but not the same. The shock used is different. More intense and terrible than insulin or electrical shock. Could you survive such treatment?" Newlin snorted. "I don't know. I'm just crazy enough to try. I won't say I like this place -- your world or the nuthouse entrance to it. But with you, I like it better than any other place without you. I think I'm in love with you." Worms of pale light flared and writhed in her eyes. Something shifted, the oddments of womanflesh shredded from her. Like a transparent mannequin of glass, she stood. Inside her, luminous organs squirmed visibly. Like a dream-woman, she stood just outside the boundaries of sanity. But like a dream-woman, she was beautiful, immortal, desirable. "You've said it," she murmured. "Now that you see me as I am, do you still want me? Say it again, now. Spud Newlin, say it in your new knowledge of the things as they really are." choice. Wandering, ill and alone, terrified, in the forests of nightmare -- he chose. Madman's choice. "I love you, Songeen. Take me to the Masters." Nightmare wavered. A hand, oddly shaped, sought his as the witchfires burned low and faded from the sky. "I can take you now. It is not far, and the Masters are waiting. I have warned you. If, after that warning, you still ask to stay, they will grant your wish. It needed only your free choice. I am glad you have chosen, but shock treatment is a dangerous chance. Are you sure you love me -- enough?" "Songeen!" his mind pleaded. "Wait!" She heard his wordless cry, and waited, opening the glowing, pure citadel of her thoughts to him. She gave no answer in words or glowing thought symbols. She waited. "No, I haven't changed my mind. I want to stay. Maybe I can learn to like your world. I want the decontamination -- the shock treatment. I'm scared, but I want it, no matter how it hurts. I want to' stay here -- but not if you're not here. I want to be with you -- Hell, Venus, or even Callisto -- I want to go with you. I love you. If my love is part of my madness, don't cure me. I haven't asked you, but I'd like to know. Do you love me?" Songeen was silent. In the glittering forest of crystalline tree forms, jeweled birds sang wild riots of bubbling, bursting notes. Darkness gathered swiftly in the dense air. "Didn't you know?" Songeen chimed, matching the bird-notes. Our names are already enrolled in the Great Book. It was custom here, our mating rite. It was the only way I could bring you. I did not tell you, because -- " She stopped, then continued. "Because I had to be sure of you. Because I wanted you to have free choice. Now you must share all my tasks, my responsibilities. Before, the task was mine alone. Now we must share it. You and I are selected -- "  "Selected for what?" Newlin broke in. He could not see her for thick darkness. But he sensed eery tension of movement, and emotion flowed to him from her mind. "For the great task, the last and greatest of all. We must go back together. To Hell. To the system you sprang from. It is for usto release to them the ultimate weapon. The deadline is close, as I told you. Other races grow desperate, now that your system's isolation is breaking down. Pressure for interstellar expansion is extreme on all of Sol's planets. The technicians work full time at the problems, and they will solve it, soon. We have until then, to kill or cure the patient. "Other powers and weapons have been released to them in the hope that mounting responsibility would bring sanity. Atomic power was turned into dangerous toys, implements of murder. We gave them knowledge of atomic fission and fusion, and they use the knowledge to butcher and destroy each other. We tried all the minor shock treatments. They have failed. The time has come for the final treatment. The major shock. We -- you and I -- must give them the ultimate weapon." protested. "But why? If they have misused everything else. Why give them something still more hideous? Why give them means for further destruction?" Her answer pulsed through darkness which glittered like black crystal. "Because it is the final experiment. The last hope for your people, your system. We cannot help them beyond that. They must choose for themselves, as you did. We must go back to Earth, this time. And it is our task to give them the final treatment and test. The ultimate weapon. Gravity displacement. Once used, it is the end. Planets will be wrenched from the Sun, electrons from their parent nuclei within the very atoms. It is the same force. The choice is theirs -- kill or cure. Sanity or destruction. You and I will stay, try to guide and help, advise, but not interfere. Like you, your people must have free choice. "We must stay with them, and share whatever happens. This is their shock treatment -- and yours. We will share it together. But come, the Masters are waiting. I will take you to them." "Together!" said Newlin, awed. "You will stay with me and share my -- our shock treatment!" "Together, always -- now. It is a small price to pay, whatever happens," murmured Songeen. Her hand drew him close, and she led him outside the zone of crystalline murmurs. Darkness leaned closer, solid, tangible. Ahead, was a great and terrible light. By Charles Recour Substitute For Thought! the hardest thing the human being is called upon to do is -- to think! No task is more arduous or more diflScult, and to confirm this supposition all you have to do is reflect on any difficult problems which have evhr engaged your mind. Thinking is no joke! It is generally conceded that the most abstract realm of thinking is mathematical. Iti some respects that is true and in others it is the exact oppasite of the facts. Actually mathematics is "simplified" thinking, a sort of thinking with nine-tenths of the work taken out. The reason for that rather surprising statement is the fact that much of what we call mathematics is actually "symbol manipulation" -- which is a sort of machine into which you put ideas, turn the crank and grind out answers. Great mathematicians have frequently reiterated the truism "a good symbology is half the battle." What they are referring to is that mathematical ideas, while very hard to, discover and understand,...become ridiculously easy in many cases, when they are framed in a set of symbols which can be easily manipulated according to standardized rules. That in effect for example, is what algebra is. Algebra is a machine for handling mathematical relationships. So is trigonometry, calculus and many other branches of mathematical thinking. The difficulty lies in first, mastering the symbology, then the understanding of what's being done. After that you just supply the problem, turn the symbolic crank and out pop the answers, neat and automatically. case, take a very simple arithmetic or algebra problem, rephrase it in words and then try to solve it in words. It's tough, mighty tough! That's what the earliest of Babylonian and Assyrian thinkers did. It's a tribute to them that they got anywhere at all, and as positive evidence of the importance of symbols, it may be recalled that mathematics didn't begin its enormous expansion until the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries by which time, the symbols had been worked out and the science had been reduced to a game of "chess on paper." This is an over simpHfication of course, a half truth, since the thinking still must be done. But symbols cut the work into a tiny fraction of what it was. Today symbology is all important and tomorrow, symbolic logic will be one of the guiding spirits of scientific advances as it is suggesting itself today. When the first savage recognized that two men and two rocks have in common their "twoness" he made an enormous step; equally important and much richer in results are the superb ideas of calling things and ideas by symbols, letters, marks -- what have you. Don't sell "X marks the spot" short! Well-Digger Giganticus... any of the earth-moving machinery in common use today, has automatically marveled at the size and impressiveness of these robotic mechanisms whose scale is that of the prehistoric monsters. It is one thing to speak of telephone switchboards and electronic calculating machines as robots ; it is another to observe the gigantic robots some machines have become. Latest in this chain of automaticity is the mobile oil-well driller! Thousands of wells per year are drilled in the United States in a tremendous effort to keep the hungry maw of oil-consumers satisfied, especially since resources appear to be dwindling at a rapid rate. The has been a major operationMuch equipment, massive and bulky and powered by large amounts of energy, is needed. Then, because nine out of ten wells prove dry, the equipment must be torn up and moved elsewhere. Enterprising entrepreneurs -- tough-bitten pioneers who would flinch at the word "entrepreneur" -- have devised a truck-borne setup which, powered and completely self-contained with two # horsepower diesel engines, practically drills a deepwell by itself! The equipment is so flexible and so ingeniously contrived, that it operates from a console-panel arrangement much like a control tower or an organ. The well is drilled ; should it be dry -- as it most often is -- the drillers tear up stakes with no trouble at all, move on, and start elsewhere. The thing is done so rapidly and so smoothly that it has a truly robot-like effect on a hypnotized observer. What is more important is that this effort points another signpost towards the future. The coal mines have seen the introduction of automatic machinery, the factories have become more mechanized, the farms too are machinery plus -- all these things confirm positively the outline of the future; machines, machines and more machines, in every degree of complexity, with every conceivable type of modern scientific development, all operated by an engineer-technician. The pattern is outlined heavily; the future belongs to the technician! Optical Sandblasting! most precise of all the applied sciences and the technicians in the field are accustomed to working in reconcile this fact with the recent A. Rhodes, who makes telescope mirrors by sandblasting! Amateur telescope-making has been discussed before in these pages since many a science fiction reader is also an amateur astronomer. Consequently the technique ordinarily used in making precise re-, fleeting telescope mirrors is familiar to many. The practice of simply rubbing two circular discs together with an abrasive between, producing a resultant mirror as the abrasives selected become finer and finer, results in a parabolic mirror with an accuracy of a fractional and has been done ever since the Newtonian telescope. Dr. Rhodes, however, wishing to minimize the tedious work of rough-grinding telescope mirrors, decided to blast out the basic curve with a sandblaster, and then finish off the mirror with conventional grinding practices. The sixteen inch mirror, with an f# curve was roughed out with a cemetery monument sandblaster. And that's all there was to it. After finish grinding the mirror was perfect. That suggests a whole new technique in optical work which has always deplored, the necessary tedium of slow grinding of resistant glass which seems after a time to develop an obstinacy 'and an obtuseness all its own. Today's age is characterized by instruments, electronic, optical and mechanical. Tomorrow will even be more of an instrument decade-Lor century -- any techniques designed to make instrument-making simpler and just as accurate are more than eventful -- they are news! Cat's Foot Seismograph! T he two-hundred inch reflecting telescope is the gadget at Mount Palomar that ordinarily makes the news. But Palomar is more than an astronomical observatory with the world's biggest telescope. It is also a seismological station, shortly to be second to none in the world. In particular it is making use of the new electromagnetic seismograph, a machine so sensitive it can record the footsteps of a cat through hundreds of feet of solid rock! An ordinary seismograph is essentially nothing more than a large mass suspended from a wire. Delicate pick-up instruments connected to it, record its inertia while the earth about it shakes. Hence, the seismographic mass remains "at rest" while the earth quakes. As is well known seismographs pick up earth tremors from distances equal to the diameter of the Earth, so sensitive are they. But the electromagnetic instrument puts even these to shame. It is a long quartz tube, about two and one half inches in diameter and one hundred and twenty feet long. It is anchored at each end to a pier set deep into the earth, while flexible supports along its length take up its weight. This "strain seismograph" like any strained quartz crystal then delivers an electrical impulse no matter hotv slightly it is disturbed. This, amplified and recorded automaticJly, provides a sonic and visual picture of earth tremors anywhere. Its sensitivity is so great it must be installed miles from human disturbances. One of the neat aspects of the recording mechanism is that it catches at a definite rate; then during play-back it speeds up this rate so that a long drawn out quake may be recorded as a pistol shot or a slightly longer rumble! Seismography is extremely important (witness its detection of the Soviet atomic bomb explosions!) and Mount Palomar is due to become the center of its research here. Metals Made To Order! M etallurgical research is opening up an entirely new field, a field in which specific metals are tailored exactly to suit a given purpose, much in the manner in which ordinary, alloys have been prepared, but differing in that ' the rarest, oddest metals are now used, with the most unusual techniques. Zirconium, hafnium, molybdenum, rhenium, columbium, cerium, thallium -- the li.st reads like a recitation of the Periodic Table, are being put to work in applications not even thought of so short a time as five years ago. Rhenium for example is a metal whose commercial importance cannot be underestimated. It is the densest metal known, it has a melting point as high as tungsten, its electron emission rate is better than that of tungsten and its lifs is greater than that metal when used in vacuum tube applications. The only drawback to wide use of this exotic metal is that it now costs # a pound! Most of these metals require refining and extraction methods far different from the relatively simple methods of the blast furnace or the electrolytic refining tank. They often must be prepared in a high vacuum chamber at temperatures extremely high. In addition they are usually associated with large quantities of "dead" ore or a sort of gangue which must be discarded slag-like. In a word, the recovery of these metals is difficult. Applied technology is jumping forward however at such a fabulous rate that no metal can be ignored, and every possible metal must be examined carefully for potential uses. It has gotten so that, if you desire a metal with certain properties, you simply specify them to the metallurgist and he goes into the pilot-plant-laboratory, operates equipment unthought of two years ago, and comes out with your sample -- done! Metallurgy has some amazing surprises coming up in the near future -- tailor-made metals are only a beginning! Rockets Made Of Light! L ight is generally regarded as the most ethereal of material substances. You don't think of mass or weight associated with dancing beams of sunlight or the flickering glitter of the stars! Never the less, light has mass, measurable and computable, and it can move "mountains." A glance at the familiar "E equals me squared" of Einstein shows that if you work the other way around, measure the energy of a beam of light, it is possible to figure out the mass associated with that light. Even more directly it is possible to measure the force exerted on an object by the pressure of a beam of light streaming against it. This implies momentum and where you have momentum, you have mass. , Thoughts like these have been occuring with increasing frequency among men who have to do with rocketry and the ultimate hopeof putting men into space. Recently it was suggested by an authority on rocketry that space ships be propelled by "sails" -- gigantic thiftfaced mirrors capable of catching sunlight and using its pressure as a propellent medium! As fantastic as that suggestion sounds it is perfectly conceivable in the vacuum of space where the slightest amount of thrust would have effect. Perhaps even more suggestive of the ultimate importance of using a light beam as a propellant, is the suggestion that eventually a motor of sorts will be designed, capable of emitting light in such quantities as to be enough to offer substantial thrust to its attached rocket -- sort of like a flashlight turned around. dinary sunlight against the Earth's surface is computed, it turns out that the figure measured in dynes or Newtons of thrust is quite surprisingly large. Now while the Earth is huge, and any rocket would be comparatively minute, the principles are still the same. Light has mass ; mass ejected at the speed of light exerts powerful measurable thrust -- enough to move things! Scientists who have taken the measure of this jheory of light-propelling naturally don't expect to see this as one of the early means of securing interplanetary flight. But many think that ultimately it may prove to be the way Man will reach the stars! That goal, remote as it may seem now to people who know we haven't even gotten into space yet, is still in the consciousness of rocketmen. Someday, interstellar flights are going to be made, and if the physics of the future hasn't given us some sort of "space-warp" drive, the insignificant motes of force exerted by beams of light may do the trick! By Lila Shaffer Editor Fantastic Adventures drifting toward mass suicide in an ever-increasing momentum. As we contemplate the vicious and deadly weapons which man, in his fears continues to produce, we have the impulse to call out: "Hold on there. You're not accomplishing a thing, you're only destroying yourself." But no one is listening. Everybody is too intent on building his own protective arsenal, to stop to think how much better if we didn't need one in the first place. Let's think about it. What are we? And what are we trying to do? There's this great big beautiful planet, rich in everything we could possibly want -- or ever absorb. Enough of everything for everybody. And then there are people -- homo sapiens -- you and me. God -- or anything you want to call Him -- created Heaven and Hell, and the Earth between. And on Earth he put Man, the highest thinking of all animals. With life. He gave man a free will, which probably includes the ability to commit suicide. But man suffers from delusions of grandeur. He's too highly impressed with an importance that isn't there. He's not irreplaceable, nor is he as tough or as smart as he thinks he is. Surn, he can blow himself to Kingdom Come. But # years from now trees and grasses will still cover the land and the sea.sons will go on...All man will ever succeed in killing is himself. It would stand to reason that God has plans for this planet of ours. With or without us. If man chooses to drop out, he will hardly be missed. Throughout our entire history, we have been busy inventing weapons that would either put an end to warfare -- or depopulate the world. Probably gun powder was the most terrifying invention of all. It created stupendous vistas of destruction -- but the world survived. Hundreds of thousands of people may have been killed, but the world survived, with enough of man remaining to continue running the show. W'hen Robert Fulton launched the first steamboat on the Seine River that day in #, he was -- without being aware of it -- introducing a new era: the invincible navy. But the best this development did was to make the British fleet invincible for # years or so. And then other, and stronger, weapons came along. triple dose of horror: the airplane, the tank, and poison gas. The awful aftermath of the gas was the nearest thing to bringing man to mutual agreement: it was the first weapon which man felt had to be eliminated. But then Einstein's theories, and all the neutrons and protons and electrons -- and it was August # and an atomic bomb was dropped on two cities, with devastating results. But the world went on. And will continue to go on. Let's face it. No bomb has ever been invented -- and there's no possibility of one ever coming up -- which will knock the seams of this planet apart. No weapon of destruction will ever be devised which can do the damage that one small tremor of nature can accomplish : like the San Francisco earthquake, the destruction of Pompeii, the cataclysm that removed Atlantis. T ruly, only a creature as con-' ceited as Man could Indulge in the fears that are currently sweeping the earth. Only a creature steeped in his own egotism could seriously contemplate tlie possibility of destroying, with his feeble brain and hands, the work of a Creator, the power and scope of which can be only dimly conceived. We feel that we have gone far in our climb toward the stars and, in some ways, we have. But little is ever said concerning the departments in which we have progressed not at all. And the backwardness far outweighs the progress. We look up into the depths of the heavens with scarcely more understanding of what it entails then had our clubbearing ancestors. Our minds are too puny to conceive either the structure of a space that never ends or -- in relation to the complete concept -- a space that has fixed boundaries somewhere beyond our reach. We have found, through stubborn searching, seemingly miracle-working drugs. But we know little of why they work. One could go on for hours, sounding the true depths of human ignorance. In fact, it somehow smacks of sacrilege, to conceive a God that would allow a handful of microorganisms such as we, to endanger, by our stupidity, any of His majestic works. So the sooner we get wise to ourselves, the better. The world will go on -- and if we don't play the leading role on its stage, there will be other actors in our place; others more deserving, perhaps, of the gift of life. U topia had been reached. All the problems of mankind had been solved. It was the perfect State. If you doubted it, you died. The Clean "Wholesome and Land tured from the rostrum, Nedl Pardeau prowled the dark auditorium. This, he knew, was the place to find them. Here was where they whispered and plotted and schemed -- feeling safe in this pure, hard core of patriotism. Safe because Cargill was the Director of Education in the New State, just as Pardeau was the Director of Public Security. Safe because Cargill's lectures were given before a commanded audience, with attendance strictly mandatory. The insistance was not really necessary of course. The people would have come to hear Cargill regardless. His was a compelling, magnetic personality. Even now his great voice was booming out: " -- and upon this anniversary of the New State, we can look out with great pride upon a clean and wholesome land. With strong emotion, we can look upon the physical manifestation of our glorious principles -- that only through self-effacement -- through fanatic love for the state -- can the individual come to complete physical and mental fruition. Upon this anniversary we see our enemies, both within and without, broken, and completely subjugated -- " This was the place they whispered and schemed and plotted. Pardeau prowled the aisles, his eyes piercing the darkness -- spotting them, cataloguing them. And thus he came upon Emil Hillerman, his Deputy of Vital Intelligence sitting dutifully in the end seat of a middle aisle. Hillerman's thick lips hung lax, his eyes squinted laboriously as he sought to follow the thread of Cargill's lecture. Pardeau tapped Hillerman on the shoulder. The latter started guiltily. He whirled and sought to identify Pardeau in the semi-darkness. Pardeau said, "Please step outside with me. I have some questions." There was fear in Hillerman's bearing as he got clumsily to his feet and followed Pardeau. But none of Cargill's .speech was missed. A battery of loud speakers carried it even into the foyer where Pardeau stopped and turned on Hillerman. He regarded the man through cold, calculating eyes. He seemed to be both enjoying Hillerman's discomfort and also listening to Cargill's booming words. traitors with twitching muscles and twitching minds who skulked in dark places have been finally and decisively defeated. Even their vaunted leader -- " "What have you been doing," Pardeau asked, "relative to Karl Lenster?"  The frightened Hillerman licked his fat lower lip as he sought for words. "Everything -- everything possible. But Lenster is clever. You know that. You know that yourself." Pardeau's eyes bored into those of the Intelligence Director. They were noted for their icy penetration, but upon this night they were like steel knives. It was as though he surveyed Hillerman from behind the bulwark of some new and hostile information. Even as he stared, Cargill was booming from the rostrum: " -- Karl Lenster, their peerless leader -- " And Cargill's voice crackled with the inflections of pure contempt. " -- a degenerate -- a dope addict who's greatness lay only in the realms of his sensual dreams. A weak, pitiful figure bereft of followers, cringing alone in -- " When Pardeau spoke, his voice held a new sharpness to complement the new ice in his eyes. He said, "In half an hour I am attending a meeting of the Council. They will want a report. What about Lenster?" Hillerman looked quickly to right and left, then back at his Chief. He hesitated as though fearing the consequences of what he was about to reveal. "You know of the Wyckoff Chemical Transformation Process -- " "Certainly I know of it," Pardeau blazed. "What about it?" "I -- I -- " But Hillerman seemed to lose the courage he'd screwed up to continue in this direction. He straightened and a little of the hangdog servility dropped away. "I am doing all that is humanly possible to apprehend Lenster. All that any man could do. The secret jails are full. My interrogators work night and day. Even a superficial check of my records would show that more has been done in the la.st six months and is being done now than -- " Pardeau raised an impatient . hand, opening a gap of silence into which the voice of Cargill poured. " -- land in which the voice of dissenter is not heard ; in which Lenster and men of his despicable ilk are forever crushed and beaten -- " Pardeau was scowling. Almost unconsciously he had held the pause, with hand upraised, until Cargill finished his passage. As Cargill stopped for breath, Pardeau jerked his haiid down sharply, completing the gesture. "I have no time for any more of this. And I resent having to seek yoU out. Next time report to my office as is proper and keep me posted as to your activities. Next -- " Pardeau eyed Hillerman for one blank moment and allowed . the threat to reflect clearly that possibly there would not be many more next times. Then he turned and strode swiftly from the foyer. faded when he picked it up again on his car radio. It was a foregone conclusion that every radio in the land would be tuned to the lecture. So great was Cargill's popularity that every citizen traveling in a car would wish to hear it and turn on his receiver. It was foolish not to have a radio properly tuned when Cargill spoke. He was saying: " -- and so under the banner of complete solidarity, we will march forward, a solid phalanx against which no force can stand. Now that our own house is swept clean of vermin -- rid forever of carrion like Lenster and his ilk, we can -- " Pardeau had traveled swiftly through the streets at the high speed reserved for higher servants of the New State. Lesser servants of the New State had learned caution and thus no regrettable deaths or rnaimings occurred; the lesser servants having grown wary and fleet of foot. ' Pardeau switched off his motor but left his radio blaring. Cargill's voice followed him up the broad steps of the Executive Building and was just fading out when Pardeau was able to pick it up again from the loudspeaker under the great arches. He entered the building and traversed the vast foyer to a niche which housed a private elevator. He entered the lift, deserting it on the ninth floor, where he entered an unobtrusive door and joined a group which consisted of the New State's well guarded pool of power and brains. There was Blanchard of Finance -- Keeley, Director of Foreign Education. Masichek overlord of the nation's larder, and seven others. When Pardeau entered, all conversation stopped and every , man looked up from a luxurious overstuffed chair. Pardeau must certainly have swelled inwardly with pride at this unconscious tribute, it was well known that he held a key position on the chessboard of politics. His was in reality the most Important job of all. It was to Pardeau that this powerful group of men looked for that which they most treasured -- their own personal safety. A chair was waiting for Pardeau. He said, "I'm sorry to be late, gentlemen. I have been on a personal tour of inspection. I'm sure you will forgive me however. I have a most interesting report." He seated himself, timing the action so it coincided with the ebb of applause coming over the speaker -- applause from the loyal multitudes who had just heard Professor , Cargill end his lecture. As it was now permissible, Blanchard reached under the' table and snapped a button. The speaker went silent. "An interesting report?" Keeley asked. "Amazingly so," Pardeau said. "I have just unearthed a traitor -- a traitor in a high place." Every man in the group strove not to react and this striving was in itself a reaction. "Most interesting," Blanchard murmured. "Are you ready to name names?" "That is my intention, but in order to forestall a great many questions, let me give you a complete background." Leiderman, Ambassador without Portfolio, and very close to the Man of Almost Sacred Name who never attended these meetings, felt strong enough to evince impatience. "The name, man! First the name. Then the details." Pardeau smiled coldly. "Very well. The name is, Karl Lenster." Leiderman sprang from his chair, his face bordering on purple. "Is this a joke, Pardeau? We all know Lenster is the arch-traitor of our times -- the leader of the resistance movement. Talk sense!" Pardeau, not in the least disconcerted, smiled coldly. "I'm sorry. Perhaps I should haVe said Emil Hillerman, my Deputy of Vital Intelligence, the man who holds immeasurable power in his two hands." Blanchard was not given to outbursts. But his lips were grim as he said, "We are waiting for you to talk sense, Pardeau." "The confusion comes from your not allowing me to tell it as I wished. There is a gap between Lenster and Hillerman'; one which -- with your permission -- I will fill." "Talk, man! Talk!" "You have all heard of Formula #, known also as the Wyckoff Chemical Transformation Process." There were expressions of both understanding and bewilderment. Noting these, Pardeau said, "For those of you who haven't made a point of looking into the thing, I'll explain. Wyckoff, in case you don't recall, was a chemical engineer of more than average ability who stumbled onto this formula before he died, most regretfully, four years ago, in #." Leiderman continued to scowl. "Wc all know each other, Pardeau. Call a spade a spade. Wyckoff was a reactionary scoundrel whom you did away with for reasons of security." "Precisely," Pardeau said. "In its essence, the formula is a process for taking over a man's brain -- his body -- his personality." "You mean -- " Pardeau refused to be interrupted. "We were of the opinion that Wyckoff, though he and Lenster were great friends, was not able to impart his knowledge to the latter. We took him into custody shortly after he perfected the formula and were fortunate in persuading him to give it to us." "But he gave it to Lenster also?" "We were certain, at the time of his death that he had not been able to do that -- we are still certain." Keeley, with a gesture, requested the floor. "I wonder if you could go into a little more detail concerning the formula -- for those of us who -- " "Of course," Pardeau said. "The formula is a combination of six chemicals and the process of transformation is relatively simple, yet highly dangerous to both subjects involved. It means sure death for the proposed host, and if not delicately handled will also result in death for the usurper. The transformation requires three hours to perform. Once completed successfully, the usurper can never return to his own body. It must be destroyed. Also, the mentality of the host vanishes after it is pushed from its original brain tissue through the influence of the formula." "Then if Wyckoff didn't give the formula to Lenster, it was stolen from our vaults -- or wherever it was kept?" "Exactly. Certain investigations I have made prove beyond doubt that Lenster got to my Deputy, Hillerman. I never considered Hillerman very bright, but I thought him to be honest and loyal. But beyond all doubt, with his aid, Lenster stole the. formula -- possibly got it verbally -- and used it to take Hillerman's body from him." Pardeau smiled grimly. "Therefore, gentlemen, we have a traitor in a high place. My Deputy of Vital Intelligence." ing to enjoy the fear he had engendered in his colleagues -- sat silent until Leiderman said, "You've arrested him of course." "No. I have not." "Then get at it, man -- get at it." "I have no intention of arresting Hillerman." Leiderman's eyes widened as did those of the rest of the company. But Blanchard, even under the impact of such a bombshell had the presence of mind to glance at his watch. Immediately he snapped on the loudspeaker. The voice of Professor Cargill blared forth: " -- and upon this anniversary of the New State, we can look with pride upon a clean and wholesome land -- " It was the rebroadcast, from recordings, of Cargill's speech and no man in his right mind would have refrained from tuning it in because everyone wanted to hear it at least twice. Leiderman, almost apoplectic, ignored the speech. "Not arresting him! Are you mad?" "I'm quite sane, and the situation is well in hand." Pardeau grinned and there was wickedness in the grin -- wickedness and intelligence. "As I said before, Hillerman was not a smart man. His job was too much for him and I would have been faced, soon with the necessity of replacing him regardless. Lenster, on the other hand, is of gradeA intellect. But, gentlemen, he is frightened -- badly frightened in his new environment -- and in order to insure his own safety, is doing an excellent job. Ever since the transformation, that department has gained in efficiency until it now ranks as one of the highest in our entire government." Slowly, Pardeau's strategy dawned on the group. Blanchard suddenly smiled. Then Pardeau scowled and went on with a new and sudden ferocity. "I have the proof, and I have Lenster-Hillerman under my palm. So he stays --  continues to do a good job for us. But he'll be watched, gentlemen. He won't be able to go to the bathroom without being under surveillance. We will Icam a great deal from him. All we need to know." "Then you'll arrest him?" the boss of the state larder wanted to know. Pardeau came to his feet. His fist slammed down on the table. "I shall not arrest him -- ever. When the time comes, I shall personally shoot him down in the street like a dog. There will come a day, gentlemen, when you will witness this act of vengeance -- when I shall make such an example of LensterHillerman as the resistance will not forget -- a morale-crumbling example, I promise you." " -- in which Lenster and his ilk are forever crushed and beaten," the speaker said. Blanchard took the floor. "Gentlemen -- I move a vote of thanks and confidence for our colleague, Neal Pardeau." The Director of Public Security stood at attention and assayed a sharp, military bow. It was a moment of rare triumph. "Thank you, gentlemen," he said. An hour later, Lenster-Pardeau was alone in his apartments. He stripped off his uniform with an air of grim satisfaction. While he undressed, he thought of the martyrs to the Cause ; the men who had died. He thought of Wyckoff and wished Wyckoff could have had the pleasure of knowing who had usurped the body of Neal Pardeau -- Pardeau the Butcher -- the infamous Pardeau. From the speaker came the third and final rebroadcast of Cargill's speech : " -- a clean and wholesome land -- " "A clean and wholesome land," Lenster murmured, and the tone of his voice w'as a prayer. Before reading this story, prepare yourself for a jolt and a chill in capsule form. O. Henry could have been proud of it. It could well become a minor classic. The Last Supper By T. D. Hamm H ampered as she was by the child in her arms, the woman was running less fleetly now. A wave of exultation swept over Guldran, drowning out the uneasy feeling of guilt at disobeying orders. The instructions were mandatory and concise: "No capture must be attempted individually. In the event of sighting any form of hufied immediately. All small craft must be back at the landing space not later than one hour before takeoff. Anyone not so reporting will be presumed lost." Guldran thought uneasily of the great seas of snow and ice sweeping inexorably toward each other since the Earth had reversed on its axis in the great catastrophe a millenium ago. Now, summer and winter alike brought paralyzing .gales and blizzards, heralded by the sleety snow in which the woman's skinclad feet had left the tracks which led to discovery. His trained anthropologist's mind speculated avidly over the little they had gotten from the younger of the two men found nearly a week before, nearly frozen and half-starved. The older man had succumbed almost at once; the other, in the most primitive sign language, had indicated that, of several humans living in caves to the west, only he and the other had survived to flee some mysterious terror. Guldran felt a throb of pity for the woman and her child, left behind by the men, no doubt, as a hindrance. But what a stroke of fortune that there should be left a male and female of the race to carry the seed of Terra to another planet. And what a triumph if he, Guldran, should be the one to return at the eleventh hour with the prize. No need of calling for help. This was no armed war-party, but the most defenseless being in the Universe -- a mother burdened with a child. Guldran put on another burst of speed. His previous shouts had served only to ,spur the woman to greater efforts. Surely there was some magic word that had survived Something equivalent to the "bread Cupping his hands to his mouth, he shouted, "Food! food!" Ahead of him the woman turned her head, leaped lightly in midstride, and went on; .slowing a little but still running doggedly. Guldran's pulse leaped. He yelled again, "Food!" The instant that his foot touched the yielding surface of the trdp, he knew that he had met defeat. As his body crashed down on the firesharpened stakes, he knew too the terror from which the last men of the human race had fled. Above him the woman looked down, her teeth gleaming wolfishly. She pointed down into the pit; spoke exultantly to the child. "Food!" said the last woman on earth. Marleij's Chain (Continued from page #) Jackson's frightened face appeared briefly, then vanished. Finally Dave lifted a heavy fist, drove it hard into Tam's stomach, then sadly lifted the choking, gasping man to the floor. The police came in, seconds later, clubs drawn, eyes wide. They dragged Tam out, one on each arm. sickness growing in the pit of his stomach. In court, a Sharkie would draw the maximum sentence, without leniency. Ten years in prison -- Dave leaned forward, his face in his hands, tears running down his black cheeks, sobs shaking his broad, heavy shoulders. "Why wouldn't he listen? Why couldn't he have gone to Mercury? Only a few months, not long enough to hurt him. Why couldn't he have gone, and worked out in the sun, got that hot sun down on his hands and face -- not for long, just for a little while. Two or three months, and he'd have been dark enough to pass -- " Conger agreed to kill a stranger he had never seen. But he would make no mistakes because he had the stranger's skull under his arm. , By Philip K, Dick Conger asked. "Go on. I'm interested." The room was silent; all faces were fixed on Conger -- still in the drab prison uniform. The Speaker leaned forward slowly. "Before you went to prison your trading business was paying well -- all illegal -- all very profitable. Now you have nothing, except the prospect of another six years in a cell. Conger scowled. "There is a pertain situation, very important to this Council, that requires your peculiar abilities. Also, it is a situation you might find interesting. You were a hunter, were you not? You've done a great deal of trapping, hiding in the bushes, waiting at night for the game? I imagine hunting must be a source of satisfaction to you, the chase, the stalking -- " Conger sighed. His lips twisted. "All right," he said. "Leave that out. Get to the point. Who do you want me to kill?"  The Speaker smiled. "All in proper sequence," he said softly. The car slid to a stop. It was night; there was no light anywhere along the street. Conger looked out. "Where are we? What is this place?" The hand of the guard pressed into his arm. "Come. Through that door." Conger stepped down, onto the damp sidewalk. The guard came swiftly after him, and then the Speaker. Conger took a deep breath of the cold air. He studied the dim outline of the building rising up before them. "I know this place. I've seen it before." He squinted, his eyes growing accustomed to the dark. Suddenly he became alert. "This is -- " "Yes. The First Church." The Speaker walked toward the steps. "We're expected." "Expected? Here?" "Yes." The Speaker mounted the stairs. "You know we're not allowed in their Churches, e.specially with guns!" He stopped. Two armed soldiers loomed up ahead, one on each side. "All right?" The Speaker looked up at them. They nodded. The door of the Church was open. Conger could see other soldiers inside, standing about, young soldiers with large eyes, gazing at the ikons and holy images. "I see," he said. "It was necessary," the Speaker said. "As you know, we have been singularly unfortunate in the past in our relations" with the First Church." "This won't help." , "But it's worth it. You will see." T hey passed through the hall and into the main chamber where the altar piece was, and the kneeling places. The Speaker scarcely glanced at the altar as they passedby. He pushed open a small side door and beckoned Conger through. "In here. We have to hurry. The faithful will be flocking in soon." Conger entered, blinking. They were in a small chamber, low-ceilinged, with dark panels of old wood. There was a smell of ashes and smoldering spices in the room. He sniffed. "What's that? The smell." "Cups on the wall. I don't know." The Speaker cros.sed impatiently to the far side. "According to our information, it is hidden here by this -- " Conger looked around the room. He saw books and papers, holy signs and images. A strange low shiver went through him. "Does my job involve anyone of the Church? If it 'does -- " The Speaker turned, astonished. "Can it be that you believe in the Founder? Is it possible, a hunter, a killer -- " "No. Of course not. All their business about resignation to death, non-violence -- " "What is it, then?" Conger shrugged. "I've been taught not to mix with such as these. They have strange abilities. And you can't reason with them." The Speaker studied Conger thoughtfully. "You have .the wrong idea. It is no one here that we have them only tends to increase their numbers." "Then why come here? Let's leave." "No. We came for something important. Something you will need to identify your man. Without it you won't be able to find him." A trace of a smile crossed the Speaker's face. "We don't want you to kill the wrong person. It's too important." "I don't make mistakes." Conger's chest rose. "Listen, Speaker -- "This is an unusual situation," the Speaker said. "You see, the person you are after -- the person that we are sending you to find -- is known only by certain objects here. They are the only traces, the only means of identification. Without them -- " "What are they?" He came toward the Speaker. The Speaker moved to one side. "Look," he said. He drew a sliding wall away, showing a dark square hole. "In there." Conger squatted down, staring in. He frowned. "A skull! A skeleton!" "The man you are after has been dead for two centuries," the Speaker said. "This is all that remains of him. And this is all you have with which to find him." For a long time Conger said nothing. He stared down at the bones, dimly visible in the recess of the wall. How could a man dead centuries be killed? How could he ,be stalked, brought down? Conger was a hunter, a man who had lived as he pleased, where he 'pleased. He had kept himself alive by trading, bringing furs and pelts in from the Provinces on his own ship, riding at high speed, slipping through the customs line around Earth. He had hunted in the great mountains of the moon. He had stalked through empty Martian cities. He had explored -- The Speaker said, "Soldier, take these objects and have them carried to the car. Don't lose any part of them." ' ' The soldier went into the cupboard, reaching gingerly, squatting on his heels. "It is my hope," the Speaker continued softly, to Conger, "that you will demonstrate your loyalty to us, now. There are always ways for citizens to restore themselves, to show their devotion to their society. For you I think this would be a very good chance. I seriously doubt that a better one will come. And for your efforts there will be quite a resitution, of course." T,he two .men looked at each other; Conger, thin, unkempt, the Speaker immaculate in his uniform. "I understand you," Conger said. "I mean, I understand this part, about the chance. But how can a man who has been dead two centuries be -- " "I'll explain later," the Speaker said. "Right now we have to hurry!" The soldier had gone out with the bones, wrapped in a blanket held carefully in his arms. The Speaker walked to the door. "Come. They've already discovered that we've broken in here, and they'll be coming at any moment." They hurried down the damp steps to the waiting car. A second later the driver lifted the car up into the air, above the house-tops. the seat. "The First Church has an interesting past," he said. "I suppose no you are familiar with it, but I'd like to speak of a few points that are of relevancy to us. "It was in the twentieth century that the Movement began -- during-' one of the periodic wars. The Movement developed rapidly, feeding on the general sense of futility, the realization that each war was breeding greater war, with no end in sight. The Movement posed a simple answer to the problem : Without military preparations -- weapons -- there could be no war. And without machinery and complex scientific technocracy there could be no weapons. "The Movement preached that you couldn't stop war by planning for it. They preached that man was losing to his machinery and science, that it was getting away from him, pushing him into greater and greater wars. Down with society, they shouted. Down with factories and science! A few more wars and there wouldn't be much left of the world. "The Founder was an obscure person from a small town in the American Middle West. We don't even know his name. All we know is that one day he appeared, preaching a doctrine, of non-violence, nonresistance; no fighting, no paying taxes for guns, no research except for medicine. Live out your life quietly, tending your garden, staying out of public affairs ; mind your own business. Be' obscure, unknown, poor. Give away most of your possessions, leave the city. At least that was what developed from what he told the people." The car dropped down and landed on a roof. "The Founder preached this doctrine, or the germ of it; there's no telling how much the faithful have added themselves. The local authorities picked him up at once, of course. Apparently they were convinced that he meant it; he was never released. He was put to death, and his body buried secretly. It seemed that the cult was finished." The Speaker smiled. "Unfortunately, some of his disciples reported seeing him after the date of his death. The rumor spread; he had conquered death, he was divine. It took hold, grew. And here we are today, with a First Church, obstructing all social progress, destroying society, sowing the seeds of anarchy -- " "But the wars," Conger said. "About them?" "The wars? Well, there were no more wars. It must be acknowledged that the elimination of war was the direct result of non-violence practiced on a general scale. But we can take a more objective view of war today. What Was so terrible about it? War had a profound selective value, perfectly in accord with the teachings of Darwin and Mendel and others. Without war the masS of useless, incompetent mankind, without training or intelligence, is permitted to grow and expand unchecked. War acted to reduce their numbers ; like storms and earthquakes and droughts, it was nature's way of eliminating the unfit. "Without war the lower elements of mankind have increased all out of proportion. They threaten the educated few, those with scientific knowledge and training, the ones equipped to direct society. They have no regard for science or a scientific society, based on reason. And this Movement seeks to aid and abet them. Only when scientists are in full control can the -- " H e looked at his watch and then kicked the car door open. "I'll tell you the rest as we walk." They crossed the dark roof. "Doubtless you now know whom those bones belonged to, who it is that we are after. He has been dead just two centuries, now, this ignorant man from the Middle West, this Founder. The tragedy is that the authorities of the time acted too slowly. They allowed him to speak, to get his message across. He was allowed to preach, to start his cult. And once such a thing is under way, there's no stopping it. "But what if he had died before he preached? What if none of his doctrines had ever been spoken? It took only a moment for him to utter them that, we know. They say he spoke just once, just one time. Then the authorities came, taking him away. He oflered no resistance; the incident was small." The Speaker turned to Congfer. "Small, but we're reaping the consequences of it today." They went inside the building. Inside, the soldiers had already laid out the skeleton on a table. The soldiers stood around it, their young faces intense. Conger went over to the table, pushing past them. He bent down, staring at the bones. "So these are his remains," he murmured. "The fcunder. The Church has hidden them for two centuries." "Quite so," the Speaker said. "But now we have them. Come along down the hall." They went across the room to a door. The Speaker pushed it open. Technicians looked up. Conger saw machinery, whirring and turning; benches and retorts. In the center of the room was a gleaming crystal cage. The Speaker handed a Slem-gun to Conger. The important thing to remember is that the skull must be saved and brought back -- for comparison and proof. Aim low -- at the chest." Conger weighed the gun in his hands. "It feels good," he said. "I know this gun -- that is, I've seen them before, but I never used one." The Speaker nodded. "You will be instructed on the use of the gun and the operation of the cage. You will be given all data we have on the time and location. The exact spot was a place called Hudson's field. About # in a small community outside Denver, Colorado. And don't forget -- the only means of identification you will have will be the skull. There are visible characteristics of the front teeth, especially the left incisor -- " Conger listened absently. He was watching two men in white carefully wrapping the skull in a plastic bag. They tied it and carried it into the crystal cage. "And if I should make a mistake?" "Pick the wrong man? Then find the right one. Don't come back until you succeed in reaching this Founder. And you can't wait for him to start speaking; that's what we must avoid! You must act ip advance. Take chances; shoot as soon as you think you've found him. He'll be someone unusual, probably a stranger in the area. Apparently he wasn't known." Conger listened dimly. "Do you think you have it all now?" the Speaker asked. "Yes. I think so." Conger entered the crystal cage and sat down, placing his hands on the wheel. "Good luck," the Speaker said. "We'll be awaiting the outcome. There's some philosophical doubt as to whether one can alter the past. This should answer the question once and for all." Conger fingered the controls of the cage. "By the way," the Speaker said. "Don't try to use this cage for purposes not anticipated in your job. We have a constant trace on it. If we want it back, we can get it back. Good luck." Conger said nothing. The cage was sealed. He raised his finger and touched the wheel control. He turned the wheel carefully. He was still staring at the plastic bag when the room outside vanished. For a long time there was nothing at all. Nothing beyond the crystal mesh of the cage. Thoughts rushed through Conger's mind, helterskelter... How would he know the man? How could he be certain, in advance? What had he looked like? What was his name? How had he acted, before he spoke? Would he be an ordinary person, or some strange outlandish crank? Conger picked up the Slem-gun and held it against his cheek. The , metal of the gun was cool and smooth. He practiced moving the sight. It was a beautiful gun, the kind of gun he could fall in love with. If he had owned such a gun ! in the Martian desert -- on the long ' nights when he had lain, cramped and numbed with cold, waiting for things that moved through the darkness -- He put the gun down and adjusted the meter readings of the cage. The spiraling mist was begin. ning to condense and settle. All at once forms wavered and fluttered I around him. , Colors, sounds, movements fil! tered through the crystal wire. He j clamped the controls off and stood i up. ing a small town. It was high noon. The air was crisp and bright. A few automobiles moved along a road. Off in the distance were some level fields. Conger went to the door and stepped outside. He sniffed the air. Then he went back into the cage. He stood before the mirror over the shelf, examining his features. He had trimmed his beard -- they had not got him to cut it off -- and his hair was neat. He was dressed in the clothing of the middle-twentieth century, the odd collar and coat, the shoes of animal hide. In his pocket was money of the times. That was important. Nothing more was needed. Nothing, except his ability, his special cunning. But he had never used it in such a way before. He walked down the road toward the town. ' The first things he noticed, were the newspapers on the stands. April #, #. He was not too far off. He looked around him. There taverns, and a ten-cent store. Down the street was a grocery store and some public buildings. A few minutes later he mounted the stairs of the little public library and passed through the doors Into the warm interior. The librarian looked up, smiling. "Good afternoon," she said. He smiled, not speaking because his words would not be correct; accented and strange, probably. He went over to a table and sat down by a heap of magazines. For a moment he glanced through them. Then he was on his feet again. He crossed the room to a wide rack against the wall. His heart began to beat heavily. Newspapers -- weeks on end. He took a roll of them over to the table and began to scan them quickly. The print was odd, the letters strange. Some of the words were unfamiliar. He set the papers aside and searched farther. At last hp found what he wanted. He carried the Cherrwood Gazette to the table and opened it to the first page. He found what he wanted: An unidentified man, held by the county sheriff's office for suspicion of criminal syndicalism, was found dead this morning, by -- He finished the item. Tt was vague, uninforming. He needed more. He carried the Gazette back to the racks and then, after a moment's hesitation, approached the librarian. "More?" he asked. "More papers. Old ones?" She frowned. "How old? Which papers?" "Months old. And -- before." "Of the Gazette? This is all we have, 'hat did you want? What are you looking for? Maybe I can help you." He was silent. "You might find older issues at the Gazette office," the woman said, taking off her glasses. "Why don't you try there? But if you'd' tell me, maybe I could help you -- " He went out. The Gazette office was down a side street; the sidewalk was broken and cracked. He went inside. A heater glowed in the corner of the small office. A heavy-set man s,tood up and came slowly over to the counter. "What did you want, mister?" he said. "Old papers. A month. Or more." "To buy? You want to buy them?" "Yes." He held out some of the money he had. The man stared. "Sure," he said. "Sure. Wqit a minute." He went quickly out of the room. When he came back he was staggering under the weight of his armload, his face red. "Here are some," he grunted"Took what I could find. Covers the whole year. And if you want more -- " Conger carried the papers outside. He sat down by the road and began to go through them. months back, in December. It was a tiny item, so small that he almost missed it. His hands trembled as he scanned it, using the small dictionary for some of the archaic terms. An unidentified man who refused to give his name was picked up in Cooper Creek by special agents of the sherifPs office, according to Sheriff Duff. It was said the man was recently noticed in this area and had been watched continually. It was -- Cooper Creek. December, #. His heart pounded. That was all he needed to know. He stood up, shaking himself, stamping his feet on the cold ground. The sun had moved across the sky to the very edge of the hills. He smiled. Already he had discovered the exact time and place. Now he needed only to go back, perhaps to November, to Cooper Creek. -- He walked back through the main section of town, ' past the library, past the grocery store. It would not be hard ; the hard part was over. He would go there; rent a room, prepare to wait uijtil the man appeared. He turned the corner. A woman was coming out of a doorway, loaded down with packages. Conger stepped aside to let her pass. The woman glanced at him. Suddenly her face turned white. She stared, her mouth open. Conger hurried on. He looked back. What was, wrong wdth her? The woman was still staring; she had dropped the packages to the ground. He increased his speed. He turned a second corner and went up a side street. When he looked back again the woman had come to the entrance of the street and was starting after him. A man joined her, and the two of them began to run toward him. He lost them and left the town, striding quickly, easily, up into the hills at the edge of town. When he reached the cage he stopped. What had happened? Was it something about his clothing? His dress? He pondered. Then, as the sun set, he stepped into the cage. Conger sat before the wheel. For a moment he waited, his hands resting lightly on the control. Then he turned the wheel, just a little, following the control readings carefully. The grayness settled down around him. But not for very long. T he man looked him over critically. "You better come inside," he said. "Out of the cold." "Thanks." Conger went gratefully through the open door, into the livingroom. It was warm and close from the heat of the little kerosene heater in the corner. A woman, large and shapeless in her flowered dress, came from the kitchen. She and the man studied him critically. "It's a good room," the woman said. "I'm Mrs. Appleton. It's got heat. You need that this time of year." "Yes." He nodded, looking around. "You want to eat with us?" "What?" "You want to eat with us?" The man's brows knitted. "You're not a foreigner, are you, mister?" "No." He smiled. "I was born in this country. Quite far west, though." "California?" "No." He hesitated. "In Oregon." "What's it like up' there?" Mrs. Appleton asked. "I hear there's a lot of trees and green. It's so barren here. I come from Chicago, myself." "That's the Middle West," the man said to her. "You ain't no foreigner." "Oregon isn't foreign, either," Conger said. "It's part of the United States." The man nodded absently. He was staring at Conger's clothing. "That's a funny suit you got on, mister," he said; "Where'd you get that?" Conger was lost. He shifted uneasily. "It's a good suit," he said. "Maybe I better go some other place, if you don't want me here." They both raised their hands protestingly. The woman smiled at him. "We just have to look out for those Reds. You know, the governrnent is always warning us about them." "The Reds?" He was puzzled. "The government says they're all around. We're supposed to report anything strange or unusual, anybody doesn't act normal." "Like me?" They looked embarrassed. "Well, you don't look like a Red to me," the man said. "But we have to be careful. The Tribune says -- " Conger half listened. It was going to be easier than he had thought. Clearly, he would know as soon as the Founder appeared. These people, so suspicious of anything different would be buzzing and gossiping and spreading the story. All he had to do was lie low and listen, down at the general store, perhaps. Or even here, in Mrs. Appleton's boarding house. "Can I see the room?" he said. "Certainly." Mrs. Appleton went to the stairs. "I'll be glad to show it to you." They went upstairs. It was colder upstairs, but not nearly as cold as outside. Nor as cold as nights on the Martian deserts. For that he was grateful. He was walking slowly around the store, looking at the cans of vegetables, the frozen packages of fish and meats shining and clean in the open refrigerator counters. Ed. Davies came toward him. "Can I help you?" he said. The man was a little oddly dressed, and with a beard! Ed couldn't help smiling. "Nothing," the man said in a funny voice. "Just looking." "Sure," Ed said. He walked back behind the counter. Mrs. Hacket was wheeling her cart up. "Who's he?" she whispered, her sharp face turned, her nose moving, as if it were sniffing. "I never seen him before." "I don't know." "Looks funny to me. Why does he wear a beard? No one else wears a beard. Must be something the matter with him." "Maybe he likes to wear a berd. I had an uncle who -- " "Wait." Mrs. Hacket stiffened. "Didn't that -- what was his name? The Red -- that old one. Didn't he have a beard? Marx. He had. a beard." Ed laughed. "This ain't Karl Marx. I saw a photograph of him once." Mrs. Hacket was staring at him. "You did?" "Sure." He flushed a little. "What's the matter with that?" "I'd sure like to know more about him," Mrs. Hacket said. "I think we ought to know more, for our own good." n ride?" Conger turned quickly, dropping his hand to his belt. He relaxed. Two young kids in a car, a girl and a boy. He smiled at them. "A ride? Sure." Conger got into the car and closed the door. Bill Willet pushed the gas and the car roared down the highway. "I appreciate a ride," Conger said carefully. "I was taking a walk between towns, but it was farther than I thought." "Where are you from?" Lora Hunt asked. She was pretty, small and dark, in her yellow sweater and blue skirt. "From Cooper Creek." "Cooper Creek?" Bill said. He frowned. "That's funpy. I don't remember seeing you before." "Why, do you come from there ?' "I was bom there. I krow everybody there." "I just moved in. From Oregon." "From Oregon? I didn't know Oregon people had accents." "Do I have an accent?" "You use words funny." "How?" "I don't know. Doesn't he, Lora?" "You slur them," Lora said, smiling. "Talk some more. I'm interested in dialects." She glanced at him, white-teethed. Cqnger felt his heart constrict. "I have a speech impediment." "Oh." Her eyes widened. "I'm sorry." They looked at him curiously as the car purred along. Conger for his part was struggling to find some way of asking them questions without seeming curious. "I guess people from out of town don't come here much," he said. "Strangers." "No," Bill shook his head. "Not very much." "I'll bet I'm the first outsider for a long time." "I guess so." Conger hesitated. "A friend of mine -- someone I know, might be coming through here. Where do you suppo.se I might -- " He stopped. "Would there be anyone certain to see him? Someone I could ask, make sure I don't miss him if he comes?" They were puzzled. "Just keep your eyes open. Cooper Creek isn't very big." "No.' That's right." They drove in silence. Conger studied the outline of the girl. Probably she was the boy's mistress. Perhaps she was his trial wife. Or had they developed trial marriage back so far? He could not remember. But surely such an attractive girl would be someone's mistress by this time; she would be sixteen or so, by her looks. He might ask her sometime, if they ever met again. , T he next day Conger went walking along the one main street of Cooper Creek. He passed tions, and then , the post office. At the corner was the soda fountain. He stopped. Lora was sitting inside, talking to the clerk. She was laughing, rocking back and forth. Conger pushed the door open. Warm air rushed around him. Lora was drinking hot chocolate, with whipped cream. She looked up in surprise as he slid into the seat beside her. "I beg your pardon," he said. "Am I intruding?" "No." She shook her head. Her eyes were large and dark. "Not at all." The clerk came over. "What do you want?" Conger looked at the chocolate. "Same as she has." Lora was watching Conger, her arms folded, elbows on the counter. She smiled at him. "By the way. You don't know my name. Lora Hunt." She was holding out her hand. He took it awkwardly, not knowing what to do with it. "Conger is my name," he murmured. "Conger? Is that your last or first name?" "Last or first?" He hesitated. "Last. Omar Conger." "Omar?" She laughed. "That's like the poet, Omar Khayyam." "I don't know of him. I know very little of poets. We restored very few works of art. Usually only the Church has been interested enough -- " He broke off. She was staring. He flushed. "Where I come from," he finished. "The church? Which church do you mean?" "The Church." He was confused. The chocolate came and he began to sip it gratefully. Lora was still watching him. "You're an unusual person," she said. "Bill didn't like you, but he never likes anything different. He's so -- so prosaic. Don't you think that when a person gets older he should become -- broadened in his outlook?" Conger nodded. "He says foreign people ought to stay where they belong, not come here. But you're not so foreign. He means orientals; you know." Conger nodded. The screen door opened behind them. Bill came into the room. He stared at them. "Well," he said. Conger turned. "Hello." "Well." Bill sat down. "Hello, Lora." He was looking at Conger. "I didn't expect to see you here." Conger tensed. He could feel the hostility of the boy. "Something wrong with that?" "No. Nothing wrong with it." There was silence. Suddenly Bill turned to Lora. "Come on. Let's "Go?" She was astonished. "Why?" "Just go!" He grabbed her hand. "Come on! The car's outside." "Why, Bill Willet," Lora said. "You're jealous!" "Who is this guy?" Bill said. "Do you know anything about him? Look at him, his beard -- " She flared. "So what? Just because he doesn't drive a Packard and go to Cooper High!" Conger sized the boy up. He was big -- big and strong. Probably he was part of some civil control organization. "Sorry," Conger said. "I'll go." "What's your business in town?" Bill' asked. "What are you doing here? Why are you hanging around Lora?" Conger looked at the girl. He shrugged. "No reason. I'll see you later." He turned away. And froze. Bill had moved. Conger's fingers went to his belt. Half pressure, he whispered to himself. No more. Half pressure. He squeezed. The room leaped around him. He himself was protected by the lining of his clothing, the plastic sheathing inside. 'My God -- " Lora put her hands up. Conger cursed. He hadn't meant any of it for her. But it would wear off. There was only a halfamp to it. It would tingle. Tingle, and paralyze. He walked out the door without looking back. He was almost to the corner when Bill came slowly out, holding onto the wall like a drunken man. Conger went on. A S Conger walked, restless, in the night, a form loomed in front of him. He stopped, holding his breath. "Who is it?" a man's voice came. Conger waited, tense. "Who is it?" the man said again. He clicked something in his hand. A light flashed. Conger moved. "It's me," he said. "Who is 'me'?" "Conger is my name. I'm staying at the Appleton's place. Who are you?" The man came slowly up to him. He was wearing a leather jacket. There was a gun at his waist. "I'm Sheriff Duff. I think you're the person I want to talk to. You were in Bloom's today, about three o'clock?" "Bloom's?" "The fountain. Where the kids hang out." Duff came up beside him, shining his light into Conger's face. Conger blinked. "Turii that thing away," he said. A pause. "All right." The light flickered to the ground. "You were there. Some trouble broke out between you and the Willet boy. Is that right? You had a beef over his girl -- " "We had a discussion," Conger said carefully. "Then what happened?" "Why?" "I'm just curious. They say you did something." "Did something? Did what?" "I don't know. That's what I'm Wondering. They saw a flash, and something seemed to happen. They all blacked out. Couldn't move." "How are they now?" "All right." There was silence. "Well?" Duff said. "What was it? A bomb?" "A bomb?" Conger laughed. "No. My cigarette lighter caught fire. There was a leak, and the fluid ignited." "Why did they all pass out?" "Fumes." Silence. Conger shifted, waiting. His fingers moved slowly toward his belt. The Sheriff glanced down. He grunted. "If you say so," he said. "Anyhow, there wasn't any real harm done." He stepped back from Conger. "And that Willet is a troublemaker." "Good night, then," Conger said. He started past the Sheriff. "One more thing, Mr. Conger. Before you go. You don't mind if I look at your identification, do you?" "No. Not at all." Conger reached into his pocket. He held his wallet out. The Sheriff took it and shined his flashlight on it. Conger watched, breathing shallowly. They had worked hard on the wallet, studying historic documents, relics of the times, all the papers they felt would be relevant. Duff handed it back. "Okay. Sorry to bother you." The light winked off. When Conger reached the house he found the Appletons sitting around the television set. They did not look up as he came in. He lingered at the door. "Can I ask you something?" he said. Mrs. Appleton turned slowly. "Can I ask you -- what's the date?" "The date?" She studied him. "The first of December." "December first! Why, it was just November!" They were all looking at him. Suddenly he remembered. In the twentieth century they still used the old twelve month system. November fed directly into December; there was no Quartember between. He gasped. Then it was tomorrow! The second of December! Tomorrow! "Thanks," he said. "Thanks." He went up the stairs. What a fool he was, forgetting. The Founder had been taken into captivity on the second of December, according to the newspaper records. Tomorrow, only twelve hours hence, the Founder would appear to speak to the people and then be dragged away. T he day was warm and bright. Conger's shoes crunched the melting crust of snow. On he went, through the trees heavy with white. He climbed a hill and strode down the other side, sliding as he went. He stopped to look around. Everything was silent. There was no one in sight. He brought a thin rod from his waist and turned the handle of it. For a moment nothing happened. Then there was a shimmering in the air. The crystal cage appeared and settled slowly down. Conger sighed. It was good to see it again. After all, it was his only way back. He walked up on the ridge. He looked around with some satisfaction, his hands on his hips. Hudson's field was spread out, all the way to the beginning of town. It was bare and flat, covered with a thin layer of snow. Here, the Founder would come. Here, he would speak tO' ,them. And here the authorities would take him. Only he would be dead before they came. He would be dead before he even spoke. Conger returned to the crystal globe. He pushed through the door and stepped inside. He took the Slem-gun from the shelf and screwed the bolt into place. It was ready to go, ready to fire. For a moment he considered. Should he have it with him? No. It might be hours before the Founder came, and suppose someone approached him in the meantime? When he saw the Founder coming toward the field, then he could go and get the gun. Conger looked toward the shelf. There was the neat plastic package. He took it down and unwrapped it. He held the skull in his hands, turning it over. In spite of himself, a Cold feeling rushed through him. This was the man's skull, the skull of the Founder, who was still alive, who would come here, this day, who would stand on the field not fifty yards away. What if he could see this, hfe own skull, yellow and eroded? Two centuries old. Would he still speak? Would he speak, if he could see it, the grinning, aged skull? What would there be for him to say, to tell the people? What message could he bring? What action would not be futile, when a man could look upon his own aged, yellowed skull? Better they should enjoy their temporary lives, while they still had them to enjoy. A man who could hold his own skull in his hands would believe in few causes, few movements. Rather, he would preach the opposite -- A sound. Conger dropped the skull back on the shelf and took up the gun. Outside something was moving. He went quickly to the door, his heart beating. Was it hel Was it the Founder, wandering by himself in the cold, looking for a place to speak? Was he meditating over his words, chosing his sentences? What if he could see what Conger had held! He pushed the door opeii, the gun raised. Lora! He stared at her. She was dressed in a wool jacket and boots, her hands in her pockets. A cloud of steam came from her mouth and nostrils. Her breast was rising and falling. Silently, they looked at each other. At last Conger lowered the gun. "What is it?" he said. "What are you doing here?" She pointed. She did not seem able to speak. He frowned; what was wrong with her? "What is it?" he said. "What do you want?" He looked in the direction she had pointed. "I don't see anything." "They're coming." "They? Who? Who are coming?" ' "They are. The police. During the night the Sheriff had the state police send cars. All around, everywhere. Blocking the roads. There's about sixty of them coming. Some from town, some around behind." She stopped, gasping. "They said -- they said -- "What?" "They said you were some kind of a Communist. They said -- " He put the gun down on the shelf and came back out. He leaped down and went to the girl. "Thanks. You came here to tell me? You don't bejieve it?" "I don't know." "Did you come alone?" "No. Joe brought me in his truck. From town." "Joe? Who's he?" "Joe French. The plumber. He's a friend of Dad's." "Let's go." They crossed the snow, up the ridge and onto the field. The little panel truck was parked half way across the field. A heavy short man was sitting behind the wheel, smoking his pipe. He sat up as he saw the two of them coming toward him. "Are you the one?" he said to Conger. "Yes. Thanks for warning me." The plumber shrugged. "I don't know anything about this. Lora says you're all right." He turned around. "It might interest you to know some more of them are coming. Not to warn you -- Just curious." "More of them?" Conger looked toward the town. Black shapes were picking their way across the snow. "People from the town. You can't keep this sort of thing quiet, not in a small town. We all listen to the police radio; they heard the same way Lora did. Someone tuned in, spread it around -- " The shapes were getting closer. Conger could, make out a couple of them. Bill Willet was there, with some boys from the high school The Appletons were along, hanging back in the rear. "Even Ed Davies," Conger murmured. The storekeeper was toiling onto the field, with three or four other men from tiie town. "All curious as hell," French said. "Well, I guess I'm going back to town. I don't want my truck shot full of holes. Come on, Lora." She was looking up at Conger, wide-eyed. "Come on," French said again. "Let's go. You sure as hell can't stay here, you know." "Why?" "There may be shooting. That's what they all came to see. You know that don't you. Conger?"' "Yes." "You have a gun? Or don't you care?" French smiled a little. "They've picked up a lot of people in their time, you know. You won't be lonely." He cared, all right! He had to stay here, on the field. He couldn't aflford to let them take him away. Any minute the Founder would appear, would step onto the field. Would he be one of the townsmen, standing silently at the foot of the field, waiting, watching? Or maybe he was Joe French. Or maybe one of the cops. Anyone of them might find himself moved to speak. And the few words spoken this day were going to be important for a long time. And Conger had to be there, ready when the first word was uttered ! "I care," he said. "You go on back to town. Take the girl with you." Lora got stiffly in beside Joe French. The plumber started up the motor. "Look at them, standing there," he said. "Like vultures. Waiting to see someone get killed." T he truck drove away, Lora sitting stiff and silent, frightened now. Conger watched for a moment. Then he dashed back into the woods, between the trees, toward the ridge. He could get away, of course. Anytime he wanted to he could get away. All he had to do was to leap into the crystal cage and turn the handles. But he had a job, an important job. He had to be here, here at this place, at this time. He reached the cage and opened the door. He went inside and picked up the gun from the shelf. The Slem-gun would take care of them. He notched it up to full count. The chain reaction from it would flatten them all, the police, the curious, sadistic people -- They wouldn't take him! Before they got himj all of them would be dead. He would get away. He would escape. By the end of the day they would all be dead, if that was what they wanted, and he -- He saw the skull. Suddenly he put the gun down. He picked up the skull. He turned the skull over. He looked at the teeth. Then he went to the mirror. He held the skull up, looking in the mirror. He pressed the ull against his cheek. Beside his own face the grinning skull leered back at him, beside his skull, against his living flesh. He bared his teeth. And he knew. It was his Own skull that he held. He was the one who would die. He was the Founder. After a time he put the skull down. For a few minutes he stood at the controls, playing with them idly. He could hear the sound of motors outside, the muffled noise of men. Should he go back to the present, where the Speaker waited? He could escape, of course -- Escape? He turned toward the skull. There it was, his skull, yellow with age. Escape? Escape, when he had held it in his own hands? What did it matter if he put it off a month, a year, ten years, even fifty? Time was nothing. He had sipped chocolate with a girl born a hundred and fifty years before his time. Escape? For a little while, perhaps. But he could not really escape, no more so than anyone else had ever escaped, or e'ler would. Only, he had held it in his hands, his own bones, his own death'shead. They had not. He went out the door and across the field, empty handed. There were a lot of them standing around, gathered together, waiting. They expected a good fight; they knew he had something. They had heard about the incident at the fountain. And there were plenty of police -- police with guns and tear gas, creeping across the hills and ridges, between the trees, closer and closer. It was an old story, in this century. One of the men tossed something at him. It fell in the snow by his feet, and he looked down. It was a rock. He smiled. "Come on!" one of them called. "Don't you have any bombs'?" "Throw a bomb! You with the beard! Throw a bomb!" "Let 'em have it!" "Toss a few A Bombs!" T hey began to laugh. He smiled. He put his hands to his hips.' They suddenly turned silent, seeing that he was going to speak. "I'm sorry," he said simply. "I don't have any bombs. You're mistaken." There was a flurry of murmuring. "I have a gun," he went on. "A very good one. Made by science even more advanced than your own. But I'm not going to use that, either." They were puzzled. "Why not?" someone called. At the edge of the group an older woman was watching. He felt a sudden shock. He had seen her before. Where? He remembered. The day at the library. As he had turned the corner he had seen her. She had noticed him and been astounded. At the time, he did not understand why. Conger grinned. So he would escape death, the man who right now was voluntarily accepting it. They were laughing, laughing at a man who had a gun but didn't use it. But by a strange twist of science he would " appear again, a few months later, after his bones had been buried under the floor of a jail. And so, in a fashion, he would escape death. He would die, .but then, after a period of months, he would live again, briefly, for an afternoon. An afternoon. Yet long enough for them to see him, to understand that he was still alive. To know that somehow he had returned to life. And then, finally, he would appear once more, after two hundred years had passed. Two centuries later. He would be born again, born, as a matter of fact, in a small trading village on Mars. He would grow up, learning to hunt and trade -- A police car came on the edge of the field and stopped. The people retreated a little. Conger raised his hands. "I have an odd paradox for you," he said. "Those who take lives will lose their own. Those who iill, will die. But he who gives his own life away will live again!" They laughed, faintly, nervously. The police were coming out, walking toward him. He smiled. He had said everything he intended to say. It was a good little paradox he had coined. They would puzzle over it, remember it. Smiling, Conger awaited a death foreordained. It was like a mirage in reverse, this strange island off the California coast -- it couldn't always be seen, but it was there -- in Time. Sinister Paradise Retch called. Bill Parker shifted the controls of the 'copter and the big craft swung in the direction Retch was pointing. Squinting his eyes against the sun glare rising from the Pacific, Parker clearly saw the island. It was miles away as yet but it swam like a mirage suspended just above the surface of the sea. The island was not large -- Parker guessed it as probably being less than two miles in circumference -- but he could make out a fringe of trees along the shore and a central peak rising like a cliff in the center. "I've found it again!" Retch spoke with fierce satisfaction -- clenched fists. Parker heard the indrawn hiss of breath following the words; a hiss that seemed to hold a promise for the future. Revenge, vengeance, triumph, or something else? Parker could not determine what emotional overtone had found expression in Retch's words. But the emotional overtone was there. Out of the corner of his eyes, Parker glanced at the man sitting in the seat next to him. What he saw did not please him.  Retch was big. He had the muscular build of a prize fighter. The scar over his left cheekbone did not add to the attractiveness of his appearance. He did not, in Tarkeis opinion, look like the scientist he had claimed to be. I Parker shrugged such thoughts aside. What difference did it make what Retch was, or the nature of his business here? He had paid charter charges on the big helicopter. "There it is, Parker!" Retch almost screamed the words. As he pointed again toward the island in the far distance, Parker caught a glimpse of a pistol in a shoulder holster under the man's arm. The sight of the gun caused a split second of alarm in the big pilot. He had not known that Retch was armed. Then the alarm subsided. Parker pressed his left arm down against his body, assurring himself that his own gun was where it belonged. The woman, Mercedes Valdar, seemed to catch sopie of Retch's excitement. She leaned forward across Retch's shoulder to stare at the island. Parker caught another whiff of the musky perfume that she used. He noticed again what he had realized the first time he met her -- that in any man's language she was a beauty. Aquiline face. smouldering black eyes, high cheek bones, a delicate brown complexion that hinted at Indian blood back several generations in the past, shf looked like something out of an exotic movie. The slacks and sport coat that she wore accentuated the fact that she was a woman. Parker was aware again of the enigma of her presence. Retch had introduced her as his secretary. Parker, accepting the man's statement, had asked no questions. Asking questions in a matter such as this was a fine way to get a bust in the snoot. "It ees the island!" Her whisper was sharp. A glow appeared on her face. "Soon we will be reech!" She slapped Parker heartily on the shoulder. "Beel, is not that wonderful!" "It sure is," Parker answered. He was as astonished by the statement as he was by the slap on the shoulder. "Shut up, Mercedes!" Retch spoke. "Parker, turn some juice into this thing." "She's cruising at about her best speed," Parker answered. "Then get her faster than cruising speed. We've found the island." His manner indicated that finding the 'island was very important but that something else perhaps of equal importance remained to be donfe. "What's the big rush!" Parker countered. "You don't think it will vanish before we get there, do you?" A startled look appeared on Retch's face. "No, of course not. That is -- " A thudding jar went through the ship. "What 'appened?" Mercedes screamed in fear. , With a snarling crash of breaking metal, one of the helicopter blades was yanked from its mounting above them. Parker had the dazed impression that he saw the big blade jerked away through the air. Then, like a leaf suddenly caught in a violent hurricane, the helicopter began to turn flip-flops in the air. "Do somesing!" Mercedes cried. As the ship jumped and began to yaw, she was thrown across the cabin. Jerking, buckling, jumping, twisting, the big helicopter lurched its way toward the surface of the sea below. Cutting the power, Parker leaped from his seat. He knew what was going to happen. He intended to try and be ready for it. R etch, gripping his seat with both hands, yelled. "We're falling!" "It's not news to me," Parker answered, jerking open the door to the compartment at the rear. Inside that compartment was a mass of synthetic fabric. Tossed to the surface of the sea, inflated by the selfcontained flask of gas under pressure, it would make a rubber raft. "You've left the controls!" Retch barked. "Do something to stop us. We're going to fall." The man's face was wild with fear as he twisted his head around to see what Parker was doing. "You damned right I've left the controls!" Parker answered. "We've lost the equivalent of a wing in an ordinary plane. If you know any way to stop a plane from falling you tell me." W'orking with deft, sure hands, he pulled the mass of synthetic fabric out of its compartment. "But we've got to get to that island. We've found it. We've got to get there while -- " "If we get there, we'll have to swim," Parker answered. "Personally, I'll consider myself lucky to get there by swimming. Here we go." The last was spoken as the helicopter began its final plunge to the surface of the blue water below them. Parker, with the mass of fabric clutched firmly in both hands, threw himself flat on the floor. The 'copter hit with a terrific thud. An instant later, Parker was on his feet. The life raft was under one hand. With the other hand, he was reaching for the handle that opened the cabin door. "We've got to get out of here. This ship will go the bottom like a rock." Behind him, Mercedes and Retch were struggling to their feet. Parker yanked on the handle that opened the cabin door. The handle did not budge. The heavy jolt the craft had taken when it struck the surface had twisted the whole frame. "Get that door open!" Retch moaned. "We'll be drowned like rats." "Hell, I'm trying!" Parker answered. He yanked upward with all his strength. The door still did not budge. Outside Parker could see the green water rising around the cabin. He backed away, ducked his head, threw himself with all his strength against the door. Under the driving impact of his body, the door vas knocked open. The mass of synthetic fabric in his arms, Parker catapulted through the opening and into the sea. He hit with a terrific splash. Mercedes followed him. Parker, treading water and working with the valve that would release the gas and inflate the raft, saw that Retch was still standing in the door of the 'copter. "What am I going to do?" Retch screamed. "Jump." "But I can't swim." "Then wait until I get this goddamned raft inflated. tJgh!" Parker's voice went into silence as arms came up out of the water and closed around his neck with a grip of death.  Mercedes, in a panic that often comes to people catapulted suddenly and unexpectedly into the water, was grabbing the nearest source of potential safety. "Let go!" Even as he spoke, Parker felt her arms close even tighter around his neck. He knew then that she was not going to let go. She was pulling him under with her. Giving one final jerk at the valve of the gas container, Parker found himself pulled under water. The arms around his neck seemed to grip like iron. He caught them in both hands, yanked at them. His hands slipped. He grabbed again. She was behind him, on his back, so he could not slug her. Meanwhile each passing second was sending both of them deeper into the sea. He yanked at her arms again. This time his fingers held. Her grip was broken. Twisting, he grabbed her hair. Then he began to fight his way to the surface. His head broke water. As he gulped air, he realized the blessed sight before his eyes. The rubber raft! His last jerk at the valve before Mercedes dragged him under had opened it. From the door of the sinking helicopter Retch was staring at the raft. At the same instant in final desperation, he jumped. His clutching fingers caught the edge of the rubber raft. Like a frightened river rat, he pulled himself out of the water. T reading water, Parker dragged Mercedes to the edge of the raft. Retch leaned over and lifted her in. For an instant, Parker remained in the water, his fingers firm on the raft, letting it support him while he gasped air into his lungs. Behind him, with a gurgle and a rumble, the helicopter sank. He swung himself into the raft. Mercedes, her masculine garb clinging to her, was sitting up. "I am sorry, Beel," she said. "I get the scare up and I grab at you. I not know for sure what I am doing. You will forgive me, no?" "Think nothing of it," Parker answered. "Anybody can get scared under these circumstances." "That I know," she answered. "But you saved my life. And that I will remember." "Forget it," Parker said. "I did what had to be done, nothing more." "But I will remember it," she calmly repeated. Parker was silent. Under her hardness for the first time he glimpsed something deeper, finer. She was the type who meant what she said. She was a woman w'ho paid her debts. Under other circumstances... Parker put the thought out of his mind. Now he set about doing what had to be done -- paddling to the island. He turned his eyes toward it. The island was gone. Calm, serene, the level face of the sea stretched away to the horizon. Fear, dark, sudden, and overwhelming, arose in Bill Parker. The fear did not come up just because the face of the sea was level and calm, the island not visible, but because of something else, something that he had forgotten, something that he had put out of his mind and out of his life. Could it be possible that -- He caught himself. In that direction lay madness. Words exploded out of him. "Hey, what the hell? Am I nuts? What became of that island? I saw it!" "I told you we had to hurry to get there when we saw it." Retch was hesitant. "It's -- it's not always there." "But it's got to be there! I saw it!" "There is a trick about that island," Retch said. "I -- it -- I -- you don't always see it. Something funny." Parker was across the 'Shaking, unsteady raft. His impulse was to take Retch by the throat, to shake words out of him. "What do you mean?" He was restraining himself with difficulty. Retch spread his hands. "Pm sorry, I can't explain. That's all I know. Believe me." Retch was telling the truth Parker decided. The big pilot swung his gaze in every direction, searching for land. Somewhere in the far distance was the peninsula of Lower California. But it was beyond range of his eyes. As far as he could see, was barren water. Setting his course by the small compass that was included as part of the standard equipment on the life raft, Parker paddled toward the south. The clumsy raft made little progress. Parker hardly noticed, hardly cared. Deep in his mind was a lurking thought he was trying to keep below his consciousness. In the front of the raft. Retch sat with his back to Parker. From Retch's motions, Parker knew the man was cleaning his gun. Parker made no comment. When Retch had finished and had turned back to him, Parker spoke. "I want to know a little more about that island. How does it happen we can't see it?" "I'm notcertain," Retch answered. "I think it's a lot like the mirages you see on the desert. This island is something like that, only in reverse. In a mirage, you see something that doesn't exist. In the case of this island, you don't see Something that does exist." "Um," Parker said, then was silent. The explanation sounded reasonable enough, as far as it went. The trouble was it didn't go far enough, not nearly far enough to quiet the thought lurking deep in the big pilot's mind. He worked with the paddle. "When you hired me to fly you down here, you told me that you knew where this island was located but you didn't tell me it had a bad habit of vanishing." "I didn't believe it myself," Retch answered. "So far as I was concerned, it was just a wild rumor." "Um," Parker said again. As he spoke, part of the thought that he had been keeping buried in his mind came blasting to the surface. "She said it was a mirage too!" he blurted out the words. "And that goddamned Dr. Yammer -- " He caught himself. Into his mind had come a vision of a woman he had once known,, and a psychiatrist called Dr. Y ammer. Pain crossed his face. "What?" Retch asked. "Who are you talking about?" "Nobody," Parker answered. "Just a woman I once knew." Her name had been Effra. Effra of the Green Eyes, he had called her. Rigidly he forced the thought of her from his mind, forced himself to think of what Retch had said. But it was no good. His mind kept going back to Effra and Yammer. "She is caught, trapped in a net of delusion and hallucination that is as solid as a block of steel," Dr. Yammer had once said, his voice precise with authoritarian certainty. "I cannot get her out of this steel block unless I hospitalize her, perhaps operate. There is no other choice, no other decision that can be made. Putting it bluntly -- she is insane. A delicate thing, insanity. We still work in the dark with things of the mind." A t the memory of Yammer's words, Parker twisted uncomfortably. He used the paddle much more vigorously than was necessary. It was as if Yammer's face showed in the water into which he thrust the paddle. Mercedes was studying Parker. "About this woman -- " "She was just a woman I once knew." "You loved her, yes?" "Well -- " Parker was silent. "Tell me what 'appened." "Nothing," Parker said. "Oh, hell -- all right. Up in LA three years ago I knew Effra. She was a pilot too, and we got to running around together. She liked to fly out over the Pacific all by herself. I don't know why; she, just liked to flirt with danger, maybe. One time she came in a couple of hours over-due. Figuring she was down in the drink. I was about to rouse out the Navy to hunt for her when she came in." He paused. Mercedes was silent. In the front of the raft. Retch said nothing. His eyes were still searching the skyline. "She was wildly excited," Parker went on. "She said she had made a forced landing on an island somewhere off the coast of Southern Gal. She also said there were a lot of strange people living on the island." He shook his head. There was i feeling in him he did not like. His eyes came to focus on a ripple in the water. A shark. It made him think of Dr. Yammer. "What 'appened then?" Mercedes asked softly. "I helped her look For the island," Parker said. "We spent months looking in our spare time. We flew over more ocean than I ever knew existed. But we didn't find it." "No?" "That island was awfully important to her. She thought something wonderful was there, what it was, she could not tell me, just that it was there. When we could not find it, she began to doubt herself, to think perhaps she had not seen it, that she had not landed there. She reached the conclusion then -- well, she went to see one of these fancy mental specialists who know everything about nothing and nothing about anything." Under the water, he could see the eyes of the shark. They reminded him of the expression in Dr. Yammer's eyes, except that the shark's eyes looked more honest. "And then?" Mercedes said, very softly. "She -- vanished," Parker said.  "Yammer was going to stick her into a hospital, use something that he called 'shock' on her, maybe operate. She ran away." "Did you try to find her, Beel?" "For asking that question, Mercedes, I ought to choke you!" Parker said hotly. "I hunted high and low. All we knew for certain was that her plane was missing. I think she decided she would simply fly out to the sea she loved, and never come back." Again his voice sank to a whisper as he visualized Effra of the Green Eyes flying out over this wilderness of waters. "I am sorry, Beel," Mercedes said gently. "Will you remember one thing, Beel?" "Sure. What is it?" "You saved my life back there. I will not forget it. If the time ever comes, I will pay my debt." "Thank you," Parker said. "But there is no debt." "You think this island we are hunting might be the same island your . girl claimed she found?" Retch spoke from the front end of the boat. "And if it is the same island?" Mercedes said. ' Anger came boiling up in Parker. "If it is that island, and if I ever get back to Los Angeles, I am going to hunt up a psychiatrist by the name of Yammer and take care of him!" Parker dug the water savagely. Gradually, his anger subsided "Where did you run into the rumor about this island?" Retch shrugged. "It was just one of those things you hear." He studied the landscape. "We should spot a boat soon." "We are not exactly on the welltraveled ocean lanes," Parker pointed out. "Does it happen that there are any other little things about this island that you forgot to tell me when you chartered my ship to fly you down here?" Retch flushed. "Such as -- " "Such as how it happened that my 'copter threw a vane just after we sighted the place?" Retch did not aqpwer. "Seemed as though somebody shot at us." "Oh hell no! The loss of the vane was accidental." "Accidents like that can happen but they usually don't. I checked the ship before we took off." Parker turned silent. There was no proof that the wrecking of the 'copter had been anything but an accident. "What do you expect to find on this island?" "I told you -- " "Just before the 'copter started down. Miss Valdar was yakking about how we were all going to be rich," Parker interrupted. The glance Retch gave Mercedes had no love in it. "Sometimes she's got her mouth open when she ought to have it shut." "I see," Parker said. "When you chartered my ship, you told me you were a scientist and that you wanted to investigate certain phenomena on this island. You said your investigation would take only a few hours. I was to fly you here and wait for you. You said you might want me to fly you back to the mainland, or might not, depending on what you found here. Is this correct?" "Certainly," Retch answered. "I'm sorry you lost your ship but the insurance will take care of it." "Insurance will take care of the 'copter but not of my neck. Are you a scientist?" "Of course. Didn't I tell you -- " "What kind of a scientist are you?" "I -- ah -- What do you mean?" "What's your specialty? Are you a biologist, a physicist, or what?" C J # "I don't believe you ire a scientist at all. You don't talk like one." "Damn it, I told you what I am and that's what I am !" Retch's face showed sullen and his hand moved toward the gun. Parker tensed. Rfetch stopped the movement of his hand. He glared at the big pilot. "Okay," Parker said. "It doesn't make any difference anyhow." He resumed paddling. The sun slid down the western sky. Retch and Mercedes huddled in the front end of the raft and whispered to each other. From time to time, the woman glanced at Parker. He paid no attention to her. The sea was calm. In the distance, a school of flying fish skittered over the surface. A dozen gulls played near the surface. A highriding fin cut the water. Shark, sensing food. The sun reached the horizon and wallowed in the sea like a fat, round shining pig on fire. Mercedes screamed, pointed, jerked a terror-stricken face toward Parker. "Beel! Beel!" She scuttled across the raft, threw herself into his arms. "Look, Beel, look!" Terror and panic almost beyond understanding were in her words. Parker looked where she was pointing. His heart climbed up into his mouth and threatened to choke him. He had thought he was shockproof, that nothing could jar him. But here was something that made his mind reel. Walking across the water toward the raft were three men. Clad in knee-length breeches, wearing cloaks, the three men looked as if they had just stepped out of the #th century. Two wore big, broad-brimmed hats, the third had a handkerchief wrapped around his head. He also had a wooden leg and he stalked across the surface of the sea with all the sureness he might have had with concrete under him. He carried a curved cutlass in one hand. The other two men were armed with swords, in scabbards. In addition, heavy, . clumsy-looking pistols were thrust into sashes at their belts. They looked like men out of a nightmare -- or like pirates out of the olden days; swash-buckling buccaneers who had somehow managed to survive their proper period in history and to live into the #th century. "Ghosts!" Mercedes screamed. "Devils! They've come up out of hell because of our sins!" She wrapped her arms around Parker's neck. "Save me, Beel, save me!" Parker caught her wrists, jerked her arms loose from his neck, and rose quickly to his feet. He hoped fervidly that his eyes had been deceiving him and that standing up would cause this mirage to disappear. His eyes continued to deceive him. The three men did not disappear. They continued to walk across the water toward the raft. They moved with the sureness of men who know where they are going. Behind them, suddenly outlined against the fat sun that was wallowing in the sea, rocky, grim, and forbidding, the mysterious island was now visible. It had reappeared. They had found it. Three men coming from it had found them. The shark found the three men. Parker saw the triangular fin cut through the water toward them. Like a speed boat taking off on a race, the fin gathered momentum. The three men saw it coming. "Ho!" one yelled. "A shark!" the second said. "Have at him, boys!" the third shouted. T he shark charged them. Drawing their swords, the three men executed a nimble dance on the surface of the sea. They thrust downward -- their swords entering the water with no difficulty whatsoever although their feet did not enter it -- drew them back dripping red. They skipped lightly out of the way of the wounded and infuriated monster! "Zounds!" "Chop the sea pig down!" "Carve his heart out!" Old battle cries rang in the air as they fought the shark. Blood colored the surface of the sea. The wounded shark suddenly took its death blow. It dived, was gone from sight, then broke the surface a hundred yards away. It beat the water into foam, threshing out its life. With pleased interest, the three men watched the shark die. Dipping their blades into the sea to clean the blood from them, they wiped them dry on their pants legs. Again they moved toward the raft. Parker's hand went to the pistol inside his leather jacket. He loosed it in its holster but did not draw it. Mercedes moaned and covered her eyes. At the other end of the boat, Retch had risen to his feet. Bracing himself, Bill Parker waited for -- whatever was to happen. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Retch slowly drawing his gun. "Damn it. Retch, put that gun away!" Parker shouted. "Don't shoot until you know what the hell is going on." Retch turned, the gun visible in his hand. "What the hell -- " Retch didn't put the gun away. He lifted it. Parker found himself staring into the muzzle. "Get your hands up!" Retch snarled the words. "Mercedes, get' that gun out of his holster. Get your goddamned hands up or I'll blow your blasted head off!" The last was spoken to Parker as the dazed pilot tried to understand what had happened. He could hardly believe his own eyes. Automatically he lifted his hands. Mercedes slid past him, got behind him, taking no chances on getting between him and Retch's gun. He felt her fingers go inside his jacket. Expertly she lifted the gun from its holster. "Toss me the gun!" Retch said. He caught the weapon the woman tossed toward him, glanced at 'Parker. "You thought I was going to start shooting at them?" He gestured toward the three approaching men. "You made a slight mistake." The grin on his face was wolfish. "What the hell have I got into?" "You'll find out, if you live long enough," Retch said. "Just behave yourself and do as you're told and maybe you'll stay alive." Again the wolfish grin showed on his face but under the grin, the words were harsh with meaning. "Ho, Johnny!" the three men were drawing near the raft. "Ho, Johnny Retch! What kind of a flying ship is this that you have brought back with you?" Retch turned to the three men. "Gotch! Peg-leg! Masterville!" Retch greeted them as old friends. The one he had called Gotch had spoken. All three of them stared at the raft and its occupants. Mercedes drew bold, appreciative stares. Parker got blank looks. Standing lightly and easily on the water, the three men surveyed the raft with doubtful contempt. "Does this thing fly through the air like the Jez -- " Gotch caught himself. "It looks to me as if it were more fit for sailing on a mill pond back in Devon." "This is not the ship that flies through the air, that ship was wrecked. This is a rubber boat that it #.X'I'#cl "Wrecked?" Gotch spoke. "But where does that leave us?" "Everything has been taken care of," Retch spoke quickly. "You can always trust Johnny Retch to have two strings for his bow." "Hmmmm. And who is this?" Gotch gestured toward Parker. "The pilot of the flying ship that was wrecked," Retch answered. "Ummmm. And what are we going to do with him?" Gotch glanced around toward the still floundering and dying shark as if he regretted their haste in disposing of what might have been a handy scavanger. "Um." He moved around the raft and stood close to Parker, staring at him. The sword in his hands still showed faint traces of red from the blood of the shark. "We do not need any more men on the island!" Lifting his blade, Gotch glared at Parker. "Do you, per'aps, need women?" Mercedes spoke quickly. Gotch turned his eyes on her. As he looked, some of the anger seemed to go out of him. "Perhaps what you need on the island are more women," hlercedes said. She smiled boldly. G otch broke into a grin. "But definitely, we need more women, if they are like you." "Hey, lay off of her, she belongs to me!" Retch spoke violently. "Come, let us pull the boat to the island," Peg-leg spoke quickly. "We have too many things to do to stand waiting here." Grumbling, Gotch allowed himself to be persuaded to get in front of the raft and join the other men in pulling it. Not until then did Parker dare to breathe. "Thanks," he spoke to Mercedes. "It was nothing, Beel. Anyone could have done it." "Thanks, anyhow," Parker said. "But what have we got ourselves into here?" "I do not know for sure, Beel. Johnny, he like me, and he ask me to come along. He say we will both get reech -- " "Shut up!" Retch spoke. Parker, sitting in the raft, watched the three men tow it toward the shore. He watched their feet. Where they stepped, the water seemed to grow firm. Pirates, cut-throats, killers, they certainly were. But added to, that was the equally obvious fact that they could walk on water. In all history, Parker had only heard of one man who could do that, and he hadn't been a man, but a God. Ahead of them, the island loomed in the sunset; a long strip of white, sandy beach ; behind it a thick growth of trees; behind the trees the rocky central mass of the island rising up into the sky. Off to the right, Parker caught a glimpse of a wreck that lay against rocks jutting from the shore. He stared at it. Unless his eyes were deceiving him, it was the wreck of a Spanish galleon, a ship that belonged to the days when Spain had been draining the gold and silver and jewels of the new world into her coffers. The men stopped, stared uneasily at the shore. Parker could make out two men barely visible between the beach and the grove of trees. "Rozeno and Ulnar!" Gotch spoke. "Watching us." His lips curled and his hand went automatically to the hilt of the sword he was wearing. "Some day I will slit the throats of that priest and that Indian." Gotch spat into' the sea. "They're not causing any trouble," Peg-leg spoke. "They're witches, by Gadf" Gotch answered. "They're warlocks, wizards." "Father Rozeno is a very devout and holy man," Peg-leg said. "He pretends to be a priest but he is more of a warlock than he is a holy man. As for that Indian, if he ever gives me the chance -- " Gotch 'glared at the figures at the edge of the grove. "Come on," Peg-leg said. Mercedes contrived to move closer to Parker. "Beel, what are theese theengs here? I do not understand them. I do not like them." "Nor do I," Parker said. A shiver passed over her. "What's the matter, baby, you cold?" Retch grinned at her. "Don't worry about it. We'll get you warmed up on the island." Imperceptibly she again moved closer to Parker. "Beel, it ees not good." "You got into this of your own free will." "Yes, but I did not know that theengs like theese were going to 'appen. I just thought -- " "Mercedes, if you open your mouth again, I'll knock your teeth down your throat!" Retch said. Mercedes was silent. As they came in to the shore, the two men who had been visible on the beach disappeared. Off to the left something else came into view. It was a small cabin plane, wrecked there in what had apparently been an attempt at a forced landing. Before they reached the shore, the fat sun had wallowed itself out of sight into the sea. In the dusk, the island looked like a vast, rocky pinnacle thrust up out of the Pai!fic Ocean, or out of the ocean of time -- Parker couldn't tell which. Mysterious, silent, it waited in the darkness like a vast sleeping monster on the surface of the sea, a monster on which Spanish galleons and planes had been wrecked. Parker, his nerves jufnpy, half-way expected it to vanish beneath the surface before they reached it. But it didn't vanish. It remained fixed, solid, firm. When they stepped from the raft, the sand under their feet was solid, the crunch of it reassuring. the trees. The island was quiet, too quiet. It seemed to brood in the darkness. In the vast stillness that hung like a pall over the place, the only sound was that of a bird, chittering sleepily in the dark woods. It was the most out-of-place sound Bill Parker had ever heard. It seemed to affect the others. At the bird-sound they were suddenly quiet, listening. "To hell with it, it's nothing," Gotch said. "Come on." Following a well defined path, they moved inland, toward the base of the cliff. Through the trees, Parker glimpsed fires. As he moved closer, he saw the source of the lights, the cooking fires of a village set against the base of the cliff. "Ho!" Peg-leg called, announc, ing their arrival. As they entered the village, the inhabitants came rushing out to them. They were the queerest lot of human beings Parker had ever seen. Spaniards, bearded grandees' in tattered and mended bits of ancient finery, Indians, squat, stalwart, Englishmen, tall and blond, a motley crew. They looked like the relics of half a dozen different nations, drawn from the fringes of time. Their garments did not belong in the #th century. Their weapons were knives, swords, bell-mouthed pistols. Their language was a mixture of Spanish, English, Portuguese, and Indian dialects. "What kind of a mad-house is this?" Parker muttered. "Get away, you!" The last was spoken to a slender Spaniard who was trying to jerk Parker's leather jacket from his back. The man snarled at him, drew back. "Get out of our way!" Retch yelled. The crowd made way for him. Calling greetings, snarling. Retch seemed very much at home here. Mercedes looked hopelessly confused and at a loss. She stared around her as if she was appalled at what she saw. Parker drew the obvious inference. Mercedes had never been here before. All this was as new to her as it was to him. But Retch had been Jiere. Off in the woodland behind them somewhere a bird chirped, the same sleepy quiet sound that Parker had heard as they landed. Now it was louder, nearer, and even more out of place than it had been before. The people around Parker also heard the sound. Startled faces turned toward the dark forest. The Sound came again, louder now. Parker was certain it was the call of a bird. But if it was the chirp of a bird, it was frightening these people. Why .should a bird-sound in the night frighten grown men? Utter silence fell. Even Gotch was still. Parker saw that the man's face had turned gray, that all the bristling bravado had passed out of him. Even Retch, showing signs of strain and growing temper, was silent. "The Jezbro!" someone whispered. At the words, the strain and temper coming up in Retch burst the surface. "There is no such thing as the Jezbro!" His voice was almost a scream. "It's only superstitious nonsense -- " His shouting voice went into silence as the sound came again. The chirp was louder now. It was no longer one bird chirping in the dark night, it was a dozen. And it wasn't quite the sound of a bird any longer, it was a musical tinkle, an air-borne throbbing somewhat similar to the sound of a harp, a softly ringing chime. Parker could easily imagine that somewhere among those dark trees was a harper, moving closer. The harpist did not seem to be upon the ground. He -- or she -- seemed to be up in the air, somewhere near the tree tops, moving in the dark night. As the .sound came louder, a man in the village suddenly went down on his knees, then another and another, until the whole group, including Gotch, were kneeling. EyBn Mercedes went to her knees in response to deep internal, superstitious pressures. Only Retch and Parker stood erect as two men strong enough to face the sound coming from the night. "Get down, you fools!" Peg-leg's voice had real anguish in it. "Get down, hell!" Retch answered. He had a gun in each hand, his own and the one he had taken from Parker. "Beel! Beel!" Mercedes was jerking at Parker's Ipg, "What is 'appening?" "Something," Parker answered. "I don't know what." There was fear in him. He could feel it in his heart, sense it in his bones, taste in his mouth. He rose above it. The sound swept through the air. It came out over the trees above them. On the ground, the kneelers moaned in response. The harping sound leaped up, became a melody of weird notes the eerie music were the moans from the prostrate humans. Looking upward, Parker caught a glimpse of something moving through the sky. It blotted out the light of the stars and it looked a lot like a bird but like no bird he had ever seen before. It was too big to be any bird that had ever flown through Earth's air, but yet it flew. As it flew, it made the sound of a gigantic harp. T he bird passed over the village, moving along the cliff. As it slid into the distance, the harp music faded slowly away, became ain the sound of a sleepy bird. Ground the village, the prostrate humans moaned, stirred, began to rise. "What the hell was that thing?" Parker gasped. "The damned fools call it the Jezbro!" Retch snarled. "The yellow cowards are afraid of it. I don't know what it is." Parker was silent. To him, Retch sounded like a man scared right down to the soles of his shoes but desperately trying to pretend he wasn't. "It was a warning sent by them," Peg-leg whispered, gesturing up toward the cliff in the darkness. "A warning to us to mend our ways." "It was no such thing!" Retch shouted. Peg-leg did not argue. He got slowly and silently to his feet. The group was silent, perturbed, and afraid. Even Gotch was silent. Whatever had passed overhead, had cast a pall of fear over them. "You bilious, yellow-livered cowards!" Retch raged at them. They made no response. The fear the Jezbro had inspired in them seemed to have made even his anger unimportant. "But what is the Jezbro?" Parker questioned again. "I mean -- " "I told you it's nothing and that's enough of an answer. Hey!" The guns that Retch held came up sharply as another figure came soundlessly out of the forest and moved toward them. An old, bent, wrinkled Indian who hobbled along with the aid of a staff. "Oh, it's you, Pedro!" Retch said. "What the hell do you want?" For all the sign he gave, the Indian, Pedro, did not hear Retch's question. He hobbled straight to Parker. "En la manana Padre Rozeno huit note el hombre e la mujer. Father Rozeno will see the man and the woman in the morning." The voice was broken with age. "I don't get it," Parker said. The Indian was already turning. He had delivered his message, his errand was finished. "That damned Rozeno is not go- ing to see anybody in the morning!" Retch yelled. The Indian staffed his way into the forest. He still seemed not to hear Retch. "Tell him they won't be there!" Retch screamed. Pedro's back went out of the firelight as he moved into the trees. Retch seemed almost to go mad. His face turned purple. Both guns came to focus on the spot where the Ipdian had disappeared. "Why shoot him?" Parker said. "He was just a messenger." "Damn it!" Slowly, while the group watched impassively, Retch got himself under control. Suddenly he began to laugh. Strangely his laughter in this moment was more horrible than his anger had been. "He sent for you, and the woman. All right, he'll get you. But I'll go with you. If he wants you. I'll take you to him." Again the laughter sounded. "Who is Rozeno?" Parker asked. "He is, or he was once, a Spanish priest. He and Ulnar think they rule this island. They are the two men we saw watching us from the shore. You'll see them in the morning." That was the last word Retch said on the subject. He took Gotch apart, to talk to him. Peg-leg found food for Parker, but refused to talk. "Na, na, my son, when the Jezbro passes over us as a great bird -- when it goes through the woods at night as a great howling beast -- we do not talk about it." Parker pressed for more information, but the old man turned stubbornly silent. Later he found Parker a place to sleep in his own hut. Parker had the impression that, all during the night Peg-leg, sat on guard at the entrance. But nothing came in the night. In the morning Retch was there, saying, with grim bitterness, that now it was time to go up the cliff to see Rozeno and Ulnar. Mercedes, looking wan and bedraggled, with hate in her hot black eyes, was with him. So was Gotch. Gotch did not look in the least happy. "What's biting you?" Parker said to Retch. "Nothing." "I get the impression something around here is just about scaring the pants off of you." "You're crazy!" Retch's voice was a snarl. "I'm not afraid of anything around here -- you -- or anybody else." As he spoke, the man's face was a mask and his eyes were wild. "Sure, okay, I get it," the pilot answered. They moved along the cliff until they came to a ledge that sloped upward. "We go up here," Gotch grunted. rose above the tops of the trees. Sparkling thinly in the morning sunlight, the sea came into sight. Circling the shoreline at a distance of about a mile, a curtain of mist was visible. It seemed to close in above them too, shielding the island h'ke a thin, shining dome. "That's a strange fog," Parker said. "It's not a fog," Retch answered. "I don't know exactly what it is, but when it is there, the island is invisible. If you are on the other side of it, you see nothing at all." "Um," Parker said. They continued upward. The ledge twisted, curved, went around the rising cliff. Slowly Parker became aware that the rising ledge was not a natural formation, it was a pathway cut into the face of the cliff. At the realization, the pilot felt a touch of awe rise in him. This ledge was old. It must have been cut into this cliff long before Columbus had sailed westward. Off in the distance beyond the curtain of mist was the coast of California, the beaches bright with bathers, the cities wrapped in warm sunshine, the roads alive with traffic. Over there in the distance were ple. Here on this island, behind this ple so close to it, was something that did not belong in the #th century, or in any other century Parker could imagine. His back felt cold. In him, somewhere, was gnawing anger. This island, this place, was real. Back in his past a horrible wrong had been done, a wrong that now ccld never be corrected. He put the thought out of his mind. The ledge turned into the cliff and became a tunnel that had been carved into solid stone. The walls of the tunnel were as smooth as polished marble. What tools could men have used in the old days to cut a tunnel with walls so smooth that they looked like glass? Modern equipment could not have done the job so well. Niches in the wall of the tunnel admitted light and gave them glimpses of the island. "Where the hell will we find -- Oh, Pedro!" Retch spoke. The Indian messenger of the night before had appeared in the tunnel. He beckoned to them. They followed him into a large room cut out of solid stone. It was one of the cleanest and most simply furnished rooms Parker had ever seen. It contained handmade chairs along the wall and a big table, also hand-made. Light from a wall slit flowed into the room. Seated behind the table, illumined by tile light flowing in from the wall slit behind them, were Rozeno and Ulnar. Rozeno had a thin nose, the narrow face of the typical high bred Spaniard. Ulnar was short and squat, his cheeks were flat, his nose hooked. Both had black eyes that were utterly fathomless. The faces were old, wrinkled, and kind. Parker took one look at this priest, and instantly liked him. As he glanced at Rozeno, saw the kindness on that face, he also saw, out of the corners of his eyes. Retch drawing S gun. In that split second he knew why Retch had laughed so violently the night before, when Retch had said that he would go with them to see Rozeno and Ulnar. Retch intended to kill both of them; to shoot them as they sat there at that table, unarmed and defenseless; shoot them like dogs! The gun was already in Retch's hand. Parker's fist went out, up, connected with Retch's jaw, a blow that had all the pilot's strength behind it. Retch's head was twisted to one side. He reeled away from Parker's blow. The snarl that came from his lips was the snarl of a wild animal. Metal thudded as the gun hit the floor. The room echoed with sound -- Mercedes screaming. Parker followed Retch, followed him as a dog follows a rat. He caught a wild man. Retch stumbled against the wall, caught himself on one of the handmade chairs, jerked himself up, and drove at Parker. The pilot met the charge head on. They went down locked together. Retch was a tornado erupting with violent fury. He threw Parker away from him, leaped to his feet. Parker pulled himself to one knee. The fallen pistol lay' in front of him. He snatched it up. Retch was coming toward him. He saw the gun in Parker's hand, ri Psi tn "I'll kill you," the pilot said. R etch caught himself. For an instant he seemed to hang in the air before Parker, yellow glaring in his eyes as he tried to make up his mind whether or not to buck the gun. "Get your hands up," Parker said. Slowly the yellow went out of Retch's eyes. ' "Get your hands up!" Parker repeated. This time Retch obeyed him. Parker backed him against the wall, took the second pistol from his pocket, his own gun. "Damn you!" Retch snarled. Parker saw that the man was not speaking to him but to Gotch, he saw also that during all this Gotch had not moved. The man stood transfixed; afraid to move. Parker turned to the two men behind the table. They had not moved cither, though Ulnar looked as if he was about to come to his feet. Rozeno sat very still. There was sadness on his face. "Go away," he gestured toward Retch. "And you, #oo, Gotch, go away." "You mean we can go after -- " Gotch faltered. "I don't want to see either of you again," Rozeno said. There was actual living pain in his voice. "Go!" "Wait a minute," Parker spoke quickly. "Yes, my son?" Rozeno's face lo.st its sadness when he looked at Parker, it came alive with sudden animation. "You don't mean to tell me you are going to let these two go?" the pilot protested. "Of course." "But Retch tried to kill you." "I know -- " "And he'll try it again. There's something here that's driving him crazy. I don't know what it is but he knows. If you turn him loose -- I would just as soon turn loose a rattlesnake, Johnny Retch." Parker's words were hard, blunt, forceful. But for all the effect they had on the old priest, he might as well not have spoken them. Rozeno smiled. "I do not think. Retch or Gotch will ever harm us. They have no means to harm us." He made a gesture with his hands, spoke a single word, "Go!" Retch and Gotch went quickly from the room, like men who were very glad to go. "I hope you know' what you are doing," Parker said, saw that Rozeno was not looking at him. The old priest was watching Mercedes. "You may stay here, with us," Rozeno added. Mercedes' face mirrored gratitude. "Thank you." Rozeno turned his attention to Parker. "You are new to our island, are you not, my son?" "Yes." "How did you arrive here? Was your ship wrecked?" "Yes. Actually, however, we were looking for this island." Swiftly Parker explained what had happened. "Retch went away, he hired you to bring him back in a ship that flies?" Rozeno seemed a little perturbed. For the first time, Ulnar spoke, a single grunted sound. Rozeno answered with a swift flow of gutturals that Parker did not understand. Ulnar grunted again, a hot light appeared in his eyes. "Kill him!" His fist came down upon tle table. i Again Rozeno looked pained. "I have worked so long and so hard with him, trying to show him the Way, trying to explain to him that the old savagery is still in his heart. Sometimes I despair of him." He shook his head very gently. The light flowing in from behind him made a halo of his long white hair. His eyes searched Parker. They were the kindest and at the same time the keenest eyes the pilot had ever met. They looked at him and through him; they probed deep down inside of him ; they seemed to search down to the bottom of his soul. Parker had the feeling he was being weighed, measured, probed. "It is not often that I offer a choice to those who come here," Rozeno spoke. "Usually they prefer to live in the village at the base of the cliff. You may live here with us, if you wish." The smile on Rozeno' s face was a living thing. Deep down inside of him, Parker felt his soul come to sudden life. "I'll stay here. Father, if I may." The smile on Rozeno' s face became even brighter. "Good, my son. You have made a very wise choice." Parker was silent, perturbed, suddenly uneasy. Here in this place two old men lived in rooms near the top of a cliff. Down below was a village where brawling men lived, men who could walk on water. In the night, in this place something called a Jezbro went on the wings of a harp. There was magic here, mysteries that went beyond his understanding. What else was here? "Tell me about this place. Father?" Rozeno nodded. "Gladly, my son, gladly. I will show you and tell you as I show you. There are things here that even I do not understand." For a second, the old priest frowned as if he was contemplating mysteries that lay afar. Then his smile came back and he was rising to . his feet. "Come with me, my son." room. Ulnar grunted hastily and gestured toward the wall slit. Looking through it, Parker saw a speedy craft moving inside the veil -- a PT boat. His heart jumped at the thought that the Navy had finally penetrated the secret of this Strange island. His heart sank when he saw that even if this was a PT boat, it was not a Navy ship. The craft was dirty, unkempt, it was not the smart, "spick and span vessel that the Navy would operate. As he watched, the boat veered abruptly, slowed, almost came to a halt as if its occupants had suddenly discovered the presence of the island. Ulnar shook his fist at the boat. "V ondel me sego!" he said. "No, no. Ulnar," Rozeno spoke hastily. "You must not vondel them. They are just some people who have stumbled through the veil and now are bewildered." "Me make 'em more frightened," the Indian spoke. He brought one fist down into the other fist, a smacking sound. "What is vondel?" Parker spoke. Rozeno seemed not to heap him. The piriest was already moving from the room. "We do not know who cut these passages here," Rozeno said. "We do not know who cut these rooms into the rock. Some race that lived a long, long time ago -- perhaps the legendary Murians, perhaps some other race -- had this island as an outpost. I think, also, they used it as a scientific laboratory; a dangerous laboratory that they put far away from their homeland. A place where their wise men -- their philosophers -- could seek out the mysteries of nature." "Um," Parker said. There was cold in him. He tried to force it away, discovered it would not go. "There is something else that is very strange about this island," the priest continued. "Time is different here." "How is time different?" "In this way," Rozeno answered. "I came to the New World with Cortez." . "I see," Parker said. "You take it very calmly." "I do not doubt my own eyes nor do I doubt you." The old priest glowed. "Good. Good. Tell me, my son, are there many men like you in the world of today? I have a dream, a secret private dream, that the scientists from your world might come here and study the strange things on this island." "They would come here in droves if they knew about it. And so would everybody else. You would be overrun by hordes of the curious." "Yes, we know that. That isn't quite what I meant. It was my hope that perhaps we could make this island what it ias in the olden days -- secret place where the wise men could come to study." The priest's face glowed again. "There is so much here to be learned and here, also, is the time in which to learn. Here great discoveries might be made. Here could possibly be discovered not only the secrets of nature but the secrets of the minds and the hearts of men. From this place, as the centuries passed, there might be fed out, little by little, knowledge that would change the world; knowledge that would change the hearts and the minds of men; knowledge that would eliminate poverty, stop wars, knowledge that would help the human race become what it must one day be." The glow on Rozeno's face was bright. The dream he dreamed was suddenly, in Parker's mind, a living, breathing vital hope, the hope of all honest men everywhere, that tomorrow might be better! "Would you, my son, help me achieve that dream? Will you go back through the veil and explain to some of your greatest scientists what we have here?" "I would like nothing better," the big pilot answered. In a way, this was his dream too, though up until now it had always been a secret, hidden, impossibletoaccomplish thing. His hand went out to Rozeno Deep inside of him, the glow grew to greater heights. Only one other thing wa.s needed to make this glow a really perfect fgpling, Effra, who had found this island and had tried to tell him about it. But Effra was gone. They moved on to a big room where some of the scientific equipment of the vanisheoKlace still functioned, Set in a sunken pool ten feet in diameter in the center of the room was a circle of what looked like mercury. Leading up from it were heavy bus bars of some unknown metal. The bus bars came together and marched across the room to a control panel, one of the strangest control panels Parker had ever seen. The meters were graduated in colors. In front of the chair where the operator sat was a keyboard like that of a vast pipe organ. How much training would an operator need to operate this keyboard? Directly in front of the operator's seat was a square panel that looked like a television screen. S ET in niches where the right hand of the operator could reach them easily were statuettes of birds, animals, reptiles. Made of some metal, they were perfect representations. Parker saw a condor, a bald-headed eagle, a humming bird, a cougar, a jaguar, an alligator. His eyes went back to the pool in the center of the room. "It is generating power," Rozeno said. "As it turns, it creates some force, some energy. I do not understand this energy. No one now alive understands it. Understanding is one of the things I hope your scientists may achieve -- come away. Ulnar." The last was spoken as the Indian strayed near the operator's seat. Ulnar grunted impatiently. There was something about that seat that lured him. But he came away. They went into another roorn, leaving behind them the pool of mercury that turned slowly, like a miniature earth on some axis of its own. Parker took one look at the contents of this room, and gasped. The crown jewels of England were no greater than these! Here were crowns of pounded yellow gold ; here Were gargoyle masks made of the same yellow metal; masks that sparkled with gems. Here, lying on the rock shelves, were ingots of what looked to be solid gold, each one heavy enough to be a full load for a grown man. Ulnar was examining a gargo'de mask. He touched a gold bar, his old withered fingers seeming to savor the feel of it. Rozeno smiled gently. "Ulnar treasures these things, they were put in his charge a very long time ago. He has been faithful to his trust." "But -- " Parker whispered. "This is a part of Montezuma's treasure, a part that Cortez did not get. There is as much of it here as # men could carry away. Ulnar was one of Montezuma's most trusted sub-chiefs. He brought the treasure here, to keep it for his Chieftan." Ulnar's wrinkled face broke into a grin. "Me take good care," he said simply. "Me clean, me polish, me save for my Chief." "Tell me one thing?" he said. "Gladly, my son." "Does Johnny Retch know this is here?" "I suppose so. All who live on our island know about it." Muscles knotted at the comers of Parker's jaws. He pressed his arms down against his jacket so that he could feel the guns in the pockets. The guns felt good. "Father Rozeno!" a voice called from a corridor outside the treasure room. "Father Rozeno? Where are you?" "Here I am, my dear," the priest answered. At the sound of that voice. Bill Parker forgot all about the guns in his pockets, Johnny Retch, Montezuma's treasure, and everything else that was on this island. He stood stock still, paralyzed. A girl came through the opening into the treasure room. She wore a dark dress; sandals; her hands were gloved; she had apparently been working at some task. She smiled at Ulnar, glanced at Parker, nodded, looked at Rozeno, smiled, then glanced back quickly at Parker as if he reminded her of someone she had once known, then turned again to the priest. "Father, I have been cleaning all morning -- " So far she got. Bill Parker broke his paralysis and swept her into his arms. "Effra -- Effra -- Effra -- " His voice was a choked whisper, almost inaudible in the treasure chamber of Montezuma. ' As she had come through the door, his mind had given him a flashing picture of the plane wrecked on the shore. Effra, fleeing from Dr. Yammer, had taken one last desperate chance on finding her island; one last lonely flight out over the Pacific. No wonder he had been unable to find her. She had found her island. She had come here. She was here, in his arms. There was wonder and awe and bewilderment in the big pilot. Here was a miracle almost past the understanding. "I've found you -- Effra -- " For an instant, she lay in his arms like a frightened child who dared not move. "Please -- " she whispered. He did not hear her. His lips sought hers, found them. She did not draw away, but neither did she respond. "Effra -- " Parker looked up. Rozeno and Ulnar were regarding him with mild astonishment. In his arms, Effra stirred again. "Please -- let me go." This time the big pilot heard her. Setting her back on her feet was one of the hastiest movements he had ever made in his life. "Effra -- I did not mean to startle you -- but darling -- " She stood irresolute, staring at him. "Please -- You have no right -- " He saw that her eyes, fixed on him, regarded him as an utter and complete stranger. "Don't you know me, Effra?" There was almost a sob in his voice. "I never saw you before in my life." window slot, stood looking out. The trees below him, the island, the sea, the PT boat lying at anchor off shore, he saw all of these things, but yet he did not see them. He had found Effra and she did not remember him, did not know him. Inside of him was agony, such pain as he had never known. He felt a touch on his arm. Rozeno stood there, his face troubled. "Do you know our Effra, my son?" "Yes." "Do you, perhaps, love her?" "Yes." "And you are very unhappy because she does not respond?" "Yes." The old priest's face grew a little more sad. "When she landed here, the last time, she made an awkward landing. She was thrown forward and she hit her head. She does not remember anything that happened before that." Rozeno's finger bit deeply into Parker'S arm. "Come now, and I will introduce you to her, as a stranger." Bill Parker found himself being introduced to the woman he loved. "I'm sorry about my actions of a minute ago," he said. "I thought you were someone else." The smile she gave him was forgiving but it was also cool and distant. "That's all right, Mr. Parker. I understand." Her voice went into silence as another sound came into the room. The sound of rapid gunfire. Parker had thought he had in his pocket the only two modern weapons on the island, but somewhere in the growth of trees far below the window slot, someone was firing a sub-machine gun. Parker raced to the slot. Below him the island lay quiet. He turned. Mercedes, her face working, was staring at him. "Beel -- Beel -- I have not told you everything! That Johnny Retch, he hire you to fly him here in 'copter, to find thees island. He also have men in boat coming. Your job, which you did not know, was to find island, then lead men in boat to it. Johnny means to take all thees. The gesture of her hand included all the treasure of Montezuma. "He have men in boat to help him take it. He does not mean to let anything stop him. Not anything!" Parker saw what he had not seen before, that Johnny Retch was a man who would always have two strings for his bow. Too late, he saw that the boat lying at anchor was not an accident. "I should have killed that dog when I had the chance!" he snarled. Shambling feet sounded in the corridor outside. Pedro burst into the room. He grunted words at Ulnar. "Pedro says men come up the ledge," Rozeno said. "They must be from the boat. We must go to meet them. It will be a great pleasure to them. Come, Ulnar. Come, Bill." He moved toward the door. Parker was across the room in quick strides, catching Rozeno's arm. "You can't do it, Father Rozeno. Those men who are coming up the ledge mean to kill." ."My son!" Hurt showed on the priest's face. "Surely you do not know what you are talking about!" "But I do know!" Parker almost shouted the words. Quickly, desperately he tried to explain the situation to Rozeno. To his growing horror, he saw no comprehension in the old priest's eyes. Slowly Parker began to realize that this old man was so gentle and so kind himself that he could not comprehend even the thought of anyone else being -- evil! "You may stay here, if you wish, my son, but Ulnar and I will go speak to these people who are coming up the ledge. Come, Ulnar." His face glowing at the thought of meeting new people, the priest moved from the room. Ulnar grunted once, a hot, savage sound, then followed Rozeno like a dog following its master. Effra started to follow them. Parker caught her arm. "Please, at least you stay here. Understand me now if you never understood me before. Is there a window slot from which the ledge can be seen?" "Yes." "Then take me to it. Quickly!" F rom the slot, Parker could see a section of the ledge. Two men were crawling along it, advancing as cautiously as scouts trying to surprise an outpost. Parker had never seen either of them before but their faces confirmed everything Mercedes had said. -- they were thugs, killers. Thrusting the pistol through the slot, the pilot took careful aim. pulltd the trigger. The thunder of the gun rang through the room, echoed across the island. The bullet knocked rock chips into the face of the lead man. He recoiled as if he had been stung. The Tommy-gun in his hand spouted lead blindly at the face of the cliff. The second man spun around -- began shooting blindly. Parker moved away from the slot, listened to the rattle of the guns outside. He could distinguish the heavy thud of the Tommy-gun, the sharper crack of the carbine, but other weapons were also firing. "They've got men with high-powered rifles posted in the tree down below." He glanced from the slot. The men had disappeared from the ledge. As he moved back, a slug whined into the room. Mercedes cowered against the wall. Effra remained cool and poised. She was looking at Parker. "Haven't I met you somewhere before?" She seenAed completely unaware of the rifle bullet that had just screamed through the slot. "I -- " Parker caught himself. There was agony in him. What good would it do if she did, finally, remember who he was, who she was? What they had once been to each other? He had three old men, and two women, and himself, with which to defend Montezuma's treasure against Johnny Retch, who had a small army of trained killers at his back. What chance did they have? Johnny Retch, even if given Montezuma's gold, would not leave anyone alive except possibly Mercedes and Effra. "Do -- do you know anything we can do to stop those men?" Parker said. Light seemed to come into Effra's eyes. "We might -- we might use the Jezbro!" From the shelter of the trees, Johnny Retch operated like a general in charge of a force of Commandos engaged in attacking a miniature Gibralter. He was a very deliberate general. When the first .shot from a slot in the cliff had driven the two men downward, he met them at the bottom of the ledge, a cigarette dangling from his lips, a submachine gun in his hands. "Okay, boys, go back on up." "There's a guy in there with a gun," one of the two protested. "He's inside and we're outside. We're sittin' ducks for him." "We're covering the slots with rifles in the trees." "But -- " Neither of the men wanted to go up that ledge again. They might be hardened killers but they did not like the idea of facing a gun they could not see. "Go on back up, boys," Retch said. He lifted the muzzle of the gun he held. "But -- " "Either go back up or you'll stay down here a long time!" They went back up the ledge. Retch retired to the shelter of the trees and watched. No shots came until they reached the mouth of the tunnel leading into the cliff. There, one of the men was killed. He fell backward from the ledge, screaming as he turned over and over. The falling man broke his way through the top of a tree and sprawled thudding on the ground. He did not move after he hit. Retch did not waste a second glance on him. Muffled but clearly audible, the blasting roar of the machine gun came from the tunnel. "He got in," Retch said. "Okay. Two more of you go up." Two more men went up the ledge. The entire population of the village had gathered to watch this storming of the cliff. They regarded Retch with wonder and with awe. Some of these men had been pirates in their day, they had known how to loot a tall ship, to kill its crew, to take over any wealth and any women it happened to carry. Watching Retch, they discovered they had been amateurs in the fine had needed a mah from the modern world to show them how the job ought to be done. They were greatly impressed, Gotch most of kll. Waving his sword, Gotch explained what he would do to that black priest, Rozeno, and to that cowardly Indian, Ulnar. Of all the listening group, only Peg-leg protested. "Yeah, you'll get them all right -- if the Jezbro don't get you first!" Peg-leg said. Retch overheard the words. "Come here, Peg-leg, I want to talk to you." The old sailor stumped his way to where Retch stood. "Aye, Cap'n." He saluted. A look of surprise appeared on the old sailor's face as the first heavy slug hit him. As the second, third, and fourth slugs hit him, the expression of surprise became one of agony. He fell without a sound! R etch stood looking down at him. The group was silent. Gotch hastily lowered his sword. "I don't want to hear any more superstitious talk," Retch said. "There are a lot of funny things here on this island but there is nothing to be afraid of -- except this?' He patted the stock of the stumpy little gun he held. "And there's enough stuff up there to make all of us rich; we'll have everything we can ever want." A glow crept into Retch's eyes as he spoke. They glowed with a yellow color and the yellow seemed to come out of his eyes and spread over his face. He glanced down at Peg-leg. ,  "Dump him into the sea," he said, walking away. The two men climbing the ledge reached the opening. They stopped there and apparently held a conference with the man who was already inside. They went inside. A few minutes later, one appeared at the opening. "You can come on up now," he yelled, waving his gun. "All secure here." "Gotch!" "Yes, Cap'n." "Come on." Gotch went up the ledge with Retch. He went in shivering fear which he tried desperately to conceal. "What the hell are you scared of?" Retch snarled at him. "Nothin', nuthin', Cap'n. Nuthin'." "You yellow-livered -- " Retch stopped in midsentence. A sound was in the air, the cheeping of a sleepy bird. It was a tiny sound, fragile, distant, far-away, almost too weak to register on the ears. Hearing it. Retch jerked his eyes to the sky, seeking the source. Gotch threw himself flat on the ledge. "The Jezbrol" Gotch gasped. "God -- God -- " Looking at the sky. Retch caught a glimpse of something moving there. It looked like a bird, but it was like no bird he had ever seen in his life. It was more like shadow -- a darkness that had a darting elusive silver color about it. Like a swooping hawk, it was diving toward the ground, aiming at the group clustered in the trees at the spot where the ledge began to rise up the face of the cliff. As it dived, the cheeping sound of a sleeping bird was becoming a flooding blast of wild harp notes. "The Jezbrol" Gotch wailed. The Jezbro dived at the men on the ground. They heard it, saw it; they scattered through the trees like frightened chickens fleeing from a hawk. The Jezbro selected a victim. Retch caught a glimpse of long, cruel talons extended ; saw the man grasped in them. The man screamed as the talons touched him, tried to throw himself flat, tried to jerk away from them. Huge wings fluttered, beating the air. The man did not escape. The talons held. The beating wings lifted him. Wild notes flooded outward. There was triumph in the music now. Huge wings beat the air. The Jezbro climbed up above the trees. Held firmly in the extended talons was a fully grown man. Watching, Johnny Retch felt panic tumble through him, panic that was like a sudden touch of an ice cold hand. They had warned him about the Jezbro. Old Peg-leg had tried to tell him. Gotch had trembled in fear. They had all insisted that there was something here that did not belong in the world as he knew it. He had laughed at them, he had called them superstitious fools. To him, there was nothing that was not of this world. Nor was there now, when the moment of wild panic had passed. As the Jezbro swept upward through the air, rising along the face of the cliff. Retch jerked up the Tommy gun. Smoke and lead blasted from the muzzle. The Jezbro was unharmed. Taking careful aim this time, Retch fired again, a furious blast of rattling sound. The Jezbro swerved, the harp notes missed a beat. From the suddenly loosened talons a figure plummeted downward, screamed as it fell, stopped screaming as it crunched against the ground. The Jezbro circled in the air. It rose upward, swooped. Huge wings flapped, a tail structure was extended. From the gaping, extended mouth, a scream arose. The Jezbro seemed to leap toward the summit of the sky. explosion of a miniature atom bomb flared for a brief second. Thunder clapped, rolled around the horizon; echoed back. In the distance the veil that circled the island shimmered and twisted as if it was about to collapse. It righted itself. Except for a puff of swiftly dissipating white vapor, the air was clear. Where wild harp notes had once flooded now was silence. Where a creature that had once looked Hke a giant bird had flapped through the air now there was nothing. wiped sweat from his face. From his pockets, he methodically refilled the almost empty clip of the gun. He looked down at Gotch, who was sitting up. "You killed the Jezbro!" Gotch was whispering. His eyes were searching the sky as if he still did not believe what he had seen happen. "Sure," Retch answered. "I don't know what the hell it was, but it could be killed. Anything can be killed, Gotch. Remember that." The sting of acid crept into his voice. "Get up. We're going on up  the ledge." "By God, Johnny, you can do anything!" Gotch spoke. He rose with suddenly renewed confidence. "Wait'll we get to them -- " He looked up the ledge toward the mouth of the tunnel. Effra was seated in the operator's chair in front of the complex control panel that resembled the key board of a strange organ. She had been watching an image move in the screen directly in front of her eyes. This image -- it had been that of a great bird -- had suddenly vanished. "The Jezbro was destroyed!" she whispered. "The core of it was struck. When that happens, the complete projection is torn to pieces!" Her face was white with strain. Parker took his eyes off the screen where he had been watching something that he did not pretend to understand. "Sometimes they are very difficult to control,". Effra continued, her voice a whisper. "Once set in motion, they seem almost to achieve life of their own. I did not send the Jezbro against the men on the ground, I sent it against the man on the ledge, against this Retch. But -- " her voice faltered. "I saw it get away," Parker said. There was turmoil in his mind, confusion. He was in a place where miracles came to life. The secret of the ability to walk on the water lay here in this room. Effra, in swift sentences had explained to him that the men who walked on the water carried little pieces of metal in their pockets; pieces of metal which increased tremendously the surface tension of the water where they stepped on it. She had also told him that Ulnar, working this equipment, had vondeled his helicopter, had sent out a tiny Jezbro that had struck at the ship, wrecking it. The Jezbro, the secret of the men walking on the water, had come from this room. The striking of the Jezbro was to Ulnar the act of vondel. Even the veil that surrounded the island was generated here ; in the power being generated in the slowly circling pool of mercury; power that was changed and modified by the other equipment. Here was the heart and the secret of the magic of this island; here even time was set aside. Ulnar poked at Effra, grunted harshly. "I know," the girl said quickly. "In just a minute."  Ulnar grunted again. He hovered over her like some massive brooding spirit. He was eager to get his hands on the control board but his old fingers were no longer sufficiently flexible to play on that key board the tune that had to be played. "Pater noster -- Our Father -- " In the silence came Rozeno's voice as he knelt in prayer. Bewildered and hurt and horrified, Rozeno and Ulnar had come back into the room to find Parker and Effra and Mercedes already there. Mercedes knelt beside him. Pedro thrust his head through the opening behind them. "Him two more men, him man that kill Jezbro, him still coming up ledge." "That's Johnny Retch," Parker said. "He's still coming. And there are probably others already inside here, looking for us in the rooms and corridors. We've got to move, Effra." "I know Bill." Her fingers started toward the control board, drew back. "I called you Bill. Is that your name?" "Yes." "It's a nice name." "But now we must hurry," Parker said. As he spoke. Ulnar grunted a single sound that set the girl into motion. Her fingers went to one of the little statuettes, an eagle, a perfect thing in its way, a marvelous representation of the bird of prey. Effra had told Parker, in hasty sentences, how these images were made, deep down in the mountain, of a particular kind of metal that was almost weightless. He watched her slip the eagle into a slot, held his breath as her fingers darted across the key board. A soft hum sounded -- currents moving -- a glow sprang into existence surrounding the little image. Slowly, the statuette began to glow with a silver light. The glow played over it, it shifted, changed, was one thing this instant, was something else the next instant. It looked like a moth emerging from a cocoon and becoming a butterfly. The tiny wings came free, the head moved. The cheeping of a sleepy bird was in the room. At the sound, a wave of cold from the deepest depths of space seemed to sweep over Parker. Here was magic beyond the comprehension of the mind. Only it wasn't magic, it was a scientific achievement of the highest caliber. A t the cheeping  sound, Effra's fingers moved swiftly on the control board, playing a symphony that only .she understood. The little eagle moved out of the slot, it spread its wings, they fluttered, it moved upward into the air of the room. With each circling of the room, it grew larger. The cheeping sound became louder, there was a touch of harp music in it now. Effra's fingers moved like lightning over the control panel. The growing eagle seemed to pick up its controls, it swirled, circled, went through the open slot, went out of the room, and into the air outside. It was now the Jezbro. Its image appeared on the screen. It shot high into the air, still growing. The scene on the screen revealed in miniature tht whole island, the sea lapping its shores, the boat lying at anchor. Effra's fingers moved frantically over the controls. "This is one of the hardest things to do. They seem to be attracted to the  sun, when first released. They struggle desperately to escape into space -- There! I've got it under control." The scene changed, became a group of men climbing the ledge. Parker saw these men suddenly jerk their heads toward the sky as they liecame aware of the Jezbro. He could imagine the fear that was shooting through them. They had seen Johnny Retch destroy the Jezbro, only here the Jezbro was again. From their viewpoint, it had miraculously come back to life and was diving again upon them from the sky. Guns were fired upward. But these men did not have the cool, hard nerves of Johnny Retch, did not have his shooting eye. They missed. The Jezbro dived among them. They scattered, screamipg. Two went off the ledge, three raced down it. One mounted to the sky to the triumphant harping of the Jezbro. Parker felt a wave of relief flow through him. Here in the Jezbro was actually a most potent weapon,  the means of stopping an attack. "Girl! You've done it!" A second later he caught himself. "But Johnny Retch wasn't in that bunch. He must already be inside the cliff." A gun roared three times inside the mountain. Footsteps faltered in the corridor outside. Pedro stumbled into the room. His face was a bloody mask.  "Him men inside." As he coughed out the words, he coughed out blood -- and his life. He stumbled, caught himself, stumbled again, went down the way a dead man goes down, never to rise again. "Qwi est in Coelis -- who are in Heaven -- " Rozeno's voice whispered through the room. The only sound. Ulnar moved slowly, stood beside Pedro. They had been master and servant but in the old days they had come up out of Mexico together, guarding a treasure. Ulnar moved to the wall, took down a heayy battle axe that hung there. "Time come for me," he said. "Me go meet men as my chief went to meet Cortez!" His eyes glinted. "Wait!" Rozeno called. The priest was on his feet. "I have resolved the conflict in my soul. There comes a time when men, even good men, must fight against the forces of evil." From the wall he took a spear. "Pll go with you two," Parker said. "In just a moment." From his jacket, he took one of the two pistols. Silently he passed it to Effra. "As a last resort, use it." "But, Bill, there is still time -- " Parker didn't hear her. He was moving with Rozeno and Ulnar through another opening. "At least," Rozeno was saying. "We have this advantage. We know our way around here." They moved silently, by side passages, through the rooms. "Find Retch," Parker whispered over and over again. "He's the heart and the core of this business. With him out of the way, we can handle the others." "Do you see anybody, Pfluger?" Retch's voice carpe from somewhere. "Naw. I think I got the old gink but he ducked out of sight somewhere." "Retch is on the other side of the corridor," Rozeno whispered. "The man who spoke last is in the next room." They slipped to the opening, peering into the next room. A man in there was crouching against the wall and watching the opening into the corridor. At the sight of the man. Ulnar went berserk. This was the man who had killed Pedro. A shrill battle cry pealing from his lips, massive axe uplifted. Ulnar charged through the door. The crouching man whirled. Smoke and thunder rolled from the gun in his hand. Ulnar had taken death wounds before he was halfway across the room. But death wounds or not, he kept going. The heavy axe came down on the head of the man who was desperately trying to fend it off. The man went down. For an instant, Ulnar's battle cry of triumph, wild and savage and fierce, roared through the honeycomb of passages, then went into silence with Ulnar, forever. "Hey, Pfluger, what the hell happened?" Retch's startled voice came. "We've got to cross the corridor to get at him," Parker whispered. "And there are other men in here somewhere." "Listen!" Rozeno whispered. Voices, a babble of sound, were coming from behind them. "The men from the village," Rozeno whispered. "When they ceased fearing the Jezbro, they found the courage to come up herfe." T he babble grew stronger. Running feet moved along the corridor. Retch shouted somewhere, but the words were lost. Rising above the other sounds was the cry of a woman -- Effra. Parker cursed beneath his breath as he ran. At the side entrance to the big room where the pool of mercury turned, he stopped, appalled. The room seemed full of men. Some of them he recognized as coming from the village, others he had never seen before. From their appearance he judged they had come in the boat. Retch was coming through the door, that led into the main corridor. The gun in his hands was centered on Effra, who crouched at the key board of the vast machine. There was a smile on Retch's face. "Parker!" Retch's voice lifted in a yell. "Parker! I've got your girl. Come on out and give yourself up or I'll let her have it." This was his moment of triumph, this was the moment when he won his victory. Parker, peering around the edge of the doorway, knew now that he had no way to go. If he moved into the room, and tried to shoot Retch, the man would certainly kill Effra in one wild burst of slugs as he turned the gun on the pilot. "Parker!" Retch yelled again. A smile on his face, he waited for an answer. Effra's fingers moved on the control panel. Mercedes got slowly to her feet. The men in the room were silent, waiting for an answer to Retch's Command. Parker stood just outside the door, hesitant. No matter what he did, it seemed to him that there was only one answer. Behind Retch, coming from the corridor, something moved. At the sight of it, Parker felt a flood of biting cold surge through him. It was a puma -- a gigantic puma. In its jaws, as it swung its head from side to side, dangled the body of a man it had killed in the corridor. It was a Jezbro puma. Once it had been a little image in a niche beside the machine from the old time. Then life had flowed into it, its own kind of life, now it walked as a huge ravening beast through the room where once it hao been a tiny image. The first man who saw it went dead white and slumped downward in a faint. The others saw it in almost the same instant. Pandemonium swept through the room. No man's nerves were proof against such a sight as this. Screaming met were suddenly trying to fight their way out of a place that had suddenly become haunted. The puma flowed into the room. Like Retch, it had yellow eyes. They glared now, with a burning light. There was a vague mistiness about this puma but there was also about it the appearance of solid reality. Retch spun to face the menace coming from behind him. The gun in his hands spat flame and fury. He had destroyed the Jezbro hawk. He would also destroy this Jezbro puma. The puma dropped the man from its jaws. It crouched. It leaped straight at the gun spouting lead. Retch slid to one side. The puma missed. It hit the floor, slid, tried to turn as a frantic girl moved buttons on the key board. The floor was slick, the padded feet did not grip. Thd tail of the sliding puma touched the pool of mercury. The tail smoked as if it was suddenly onfire. The puma screamed. It seemed to be drawn into the pool. It was as if something in the pool caught the puma, held it, pulled it into the mercury. It went out of sight, vanished. No puff of flame followed. The life that had animated it had come from this pool. Now the life had returned to its source. The dazed Retch lowered his smoking gun. Parker moved silently forward. "Lay down the gun, Johnny Retch!" he said. Retch seemed to stiffen. His back was to Parker. He did not attempt to turn. "You called for me' Parker said. "Here I am. Drop the gun!" Retch snarled, spun, dropping flat as he turned. His eyes were narrowed. They glared at Parker like twin flames of yellow hate. He tried to bring up the gun. Something came through the air, something that he did not see. It grabbed his arms, clutched them with a fierce grip, screamed at him. Mercedes! Retch, with one savage thrust, flung her aside. Again the two yellow eyes glared at Parker as Retch brought up the weapon that he held. "You haven licked me yet!" Retch screamem The gun in Parker's hand exploded. Suddenly Retch had three eyes. One of them was in the middle of his forehead. It was round and blue. He stood for a second, transfixed. Something had happened to him. He did not know exactly what it was. He had come here seeking Montezuma's treasure. He had it in the reach of his hand. But somthing had happened to him. What it was he did not quite know. Something -- He tried to lift the gun he held. His hands would not obey him. Or perhaps the gun had suddenly grown too heavy for him to lift. He could not raise it. The yellow light in his eyes did not change. But suddenly he collapsed, went down, did not move. E ven after he was on the floor, his eyes remained fixed on Parker, glaring, yellow. Then, little by little, the yellow flames began to go out. In the silence were two sounds. The first, Mercedes, whispering. " 'Ave I paid my debt, Beel? I tried." "You have paid it," Parker said. The other sound was that of the old priest beginning the prayers for the dying. He had laid aside his spear. Now he was kneeling again, his voice lifting as he prayed even for those who had mis-used him. Then there was another sound, voices shouting in the distance. The men who had run from this room were trying to regain their courage, trying to find the will to come back again. Parker moved to the girl who sat at the key board. "Effra, my dear, if you would -- " Catching his idea, she nodded. Her fingers lifted the image of an alligator from its niche. Parker saw the 'gator waddle from this room of mystery and of magic, from . this room of lost science, from this forgotten laboratory of a vanished race. After the alligator, went a jungle fat, full of spit and scratch and the sounds of fury. After the cat went a jaguar, black, fanged, also with yellow eyes. In the corridors the screaming stopped. Parker, listening, shuddered. He was glad he was not out in one of those corridors; one of the men who had tried to steal the treasure of Montezuma, one of the men who had followed Johnny Retch. Hell was walking through those tunnels -- hell in the form of an alligator; hell in the form of a jungle cat; hell in the form of a jaguar with yellow eyes. From the window slot, Parker watched men swarm out of the cliff. Some found the small boats, pushed out in them to the PT boat. Others swam. A jaguar went along the shoreline screeching at them. A jungle cat spat at them from the edge of the water. On the boat, the anchors were hastily cast off. Powerful motors growled. Gathering speed, leaving a growing wake behind it, the boat drove itself into the veil, went out of sight. Parker went back to the girl at the key board. Her eyes came up to him. "Hello, Bill," she said. "Effra?" he whispered. "As I was sitting here, I remembered who you were -- and who I am -- Bill -- Bill -- " She came into his arms. ' Hours later, on a balcony in front of one of the window slots, they still stood very close together. Rozeno and Mercedes were with them. Rozeno was speaking. "Do you think, my son, that you can go out into the world, and contact the great men of this time, and bring them here one by one, so that we may build in this secure spot a group from which the lines of progress can flow out to all men in al! the corners of the earth?" "I can. Father," Parker answered, "Unto all men -- Rozeno's lips moved in prayer. "Unto all men -- ' I the I I I Ed: Let me congratulate you on the selection and publication of Charles DeVet's Infinity's Child. Once every so often, science fiction turns up a tale of this excellence which gives the fans something to rave about. I hope we will continue to hear from Mr. DeVet who had the freshest slant on things I've ever had the pleasure to read. -- Frank Edwards Manhattan, Tenn.    Paul : This is just a note commenting on the second issue of IF. I liked Resurrection Seven, but for the most part, the remaining stories left me cold. I imagine you get plenty of favorable response, however. What really got me was the piece on Raymond. It was the fairest, most honest and genuinely objective piece of criticism or reportage I've ever seen in any s-f mag. You didn't flatter or cajole, or rip bitingly. You told the Palmer saga with plenty of emphasis on the intriguing Shaver thing as jt should have been told. Damned good! My criticisms of the stories perhaps isn't fair, because I'm speaking somewhat as a jaded roue who has seen too much s-f. I'm too hipped on Heinlein and Clark I guess, to really enjoy any others from the s-f line. You're doing all right. Incidentally, whoever prints your mag does a bang-up make-up job. -- Henry Bott # W. Grace St. Chicago, #. Henry Bott is also, Charles Recour who does that short, very interesting science stuff.    Ed:... In. my opinion, your first issue topped your second. How about grabbing another Browne story (if possible). -- Bacil Guiley # Jefferson St. Warren, Pa.    Dear Sir: Just finished the second issile of IF. I thought the first one was a world-beater, but I can honestly say that issue ## was the best single issue of science fiction I've ever read and I grab them all the minute they hit the stands. Due to the spotty performance of most of the others I've never felt assured about a magazine to send in a subscription. But if your next issUe of IF comes even close to the first two, brother you'll have my subscription in the next mail -- and that's a promise... Incidentally, I hope you have guts enough to keep the magazine free of the so-called active fan nonsense. I buy and read magazines for the stories in them, and any space given to other garbage is paid for by my money too. -- F. J. Robertson # Constitution Rd. Camden, New Jersey Mr. Robertson! What you said!   Dear Mr. Sturgeon ; My wife and I have just read your short story, Never Underestimate in this month's issue of IF magazine. May I be so bold as to suggest you put this delightful and amusing tale into play form? Although we are not connected professionally with the theater, we feel sure that your charming plot and snappy dialogue would be enthusiastically received on the boards. Thank you very much for the pleasant moments supplied by your story that is both provocative and amusing. -- Philip W. Rubin I i #-# #th Ave., Forest Hills, N. Y. Dear Ed: On the basis of your first two issues, I think we can rate IF among the top stf mags. As for the story ratings :  #. It Takes a Thief #. Infinites Child #. Jungle in the Sky #. The Revealing Pattern #. Dreamer's World #. Resurrection Seven #. The Beast #. Welcome Martians Your cover, I thought, was the mag's worst point. Seems to me I've seen it before a hundred times. How about a quasi-modern art cover? At leat it would be different. A couple of the institutions of secondary education in this fair city, namely Central and North High, have organized fan clubs. The former has twelve members, including me, and the latter twenty-four. By the way, why not publish a list of national science fiction clubs and requirements for membership? -- Jerry Watkins #I Jones St. Omaha, Neb. As a matter of policy, Jerry, we are not going to publicize fan clubs. Therefore, the item that a couple of institutions of secondary education in your fair city, namely Central and North High, have organized fan clubs, the former having twelve members including you, and the latter twenty-two, cannot appear in these columns. So solly. Dear Sir : I've just finished the May issue of IF. Liked it very much. I won't make any attempt to rate the stories because what I like sometimes I dislike at another time. I do have a gripe, two in fact. Why must experience be the deciding factor so much? In your editorial you say, pardon me, in answer to a letter, that writers stay on top because they're good. I say they stay on top because they have been good. Just as long as it takes for a few stinkers to force the editors to take drastic action. It appears very much as if a writer's reputation counts all too highly when it comes to buying his stories. I depend on the editor of my favorite magazines to choose good stories and if he starts failing I'll quit buying. My other gripe concerns the topic and twist the author gives the stories. Let one have the hero fail and there's a dearth of heroes failing. Every outstanding story has a host of copy cats hoping to cash in on the new twist. Every new theme gets worked to death. But don't take my gripes too seriously. You can put in a stinker once in a while and I won't give up entirely. I might miss an issue or two but hope will rise up and I'll try again. I'm only trying to keep think that accounts for more failures than any other cause. -- Delbert C. Boecher Port Byron, #.    Dear Editor: Your second issue has just finished completely amazing meat the great deal of improvement IF has undergone in the short space of a month or two. The"Jungle in the Sky" by Lesser was well written but could of had a better plot. Your short stories were of such good quality that I wi.sh all mags would follow suit. The best was "Resurrection Seven". But the best story of the issue was "Infinity's Child" by Charles V. DcVet. I don't see what was so great about your cover. It just didnU jell with me. That hairy arm holding hands with the hero while he quite deftly shoots his pi.stol (?) at the little green men. I'll take a Bronstell any day. -- Robert Kessler North Hollywood, Calif. Let Mj know what you think about the cover on the next (November) issue. U'f 're trying to get the best -- nothin: ess.  .  Dear Sirs: I have just finished reading your May issue of IF. It is great. Not many science fiction magazines come up to your quality. Most of them usually show a frontpiece of a well-proportioned lovely in the arms of a three-headed ghoul, who is about to be killed by a "Super-Hypo-Sonic Galaxy Blaster" held by the hero. Again, let me say that this magazine is great; keep the good stories coming. By the way, I missed your first issue of IF (March) and would like to have it. Enclosed please find #c for it. Thank you. -- Paul Minches Los Angeles, Calif. Sorry, Paul, that we had to return your #c, along with that of many others, because we had no available copies of the first (March) issue at the time you wrote. However, since then we have managed to obtain a limited supply and if you still ivant it, shoot us the #c again. #f Dear Editor : For two years I've been an avid science fiction fan... Over this time I have acquired two pet hates: SF mags, which have around ## fantasy (which I can't stand) and #c mags that give you nothing for your money. IF answers both of these. No fantasy and a mag chockfull of stories. When I saw your first issue with # shorts, a novelette and a full length novel I said to myself "I don't care how bad it is with so much in it I have to have it." I was really surprised when I didn't find a bad tory in it. I raced to get your next issue. By the way, would you please tell Janet Steiner those old hacks (sarcastic) like Palmer, Lesser, Shaver, Sturjust fine. -- Hal Shane ' Lawrence, New York   Dear Mr. Fairman: Congrats on a good new mag; your May "ish" compared favorably with any of the other digestsize mags in the SF field. I waited until now to write, so as to see your second "ish"; you can't really tell the merits of a mag by its first issue. I can now say, and that truly, that you have a 'zine worth reading; but first, a few gripes. (#) How about some better cover artists? also interiors. (#) Drop the Science briefs and put in more letters. There are too many of those little hunks of science going the rounds in stf today. "Twelve Times Zero" was very good, but the shorts were all better. Ditto in the May "ish". Improve your novels. Personalities in SF I like -- let's have more of it. Guest editorial... Keep it up in future issues... Incidentally, thanks for your startling expose of Palmer in May "ish"; our Palmer For President club greatly appreciated it... So may Krishna bless you and may all Thy eggs be fertile. -- Bruce Beatie Walnut Creek, Cal. Crosswords, Askews, Skeletons, Word Chains, Slidogroms, Cryptograms, Diagramless, Crostics, Round-ond-Round, Movies, Sports, Politics, Radio, Television -- hcrs and hours of fun end thought-provoking enterfor puzzle pleasure!... At all newsstands -- only # cents!  Hayden Planetarium in '"Rocket to the Moon", a space-travel show, at the Hayden Planetarium in New York, Notice that this giant space satellite is spool-like, not wheel-like, and that the receiving end launching points are a continuous tunnel through the middle of the "spool", with observation domes above and below. A lunar ship is now on its way to the moon. For its approach, see third cover. All Stories New and Complete Cover by Ralph Joiner; Illustrations by Beecham, Speicher, Martin, Zimmerman a e IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc. Volume #, No. #. Copyright #. Office of publication, B Lord Street, Buffalo, New York. Application for Entry as Second Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York, pending. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction; any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. Not responsible for unsolicited artwork or manuscripts. #c a copy. Printed in U.S.A. Next issue on sale November #th entirely too big for his hat band and that he's due for a long ride, downward very shortly. By very shortly, I don't mean today or tomorrow necessarily. I'm speaking in relation to the long-time cycle in which shortly could be fifty or even a hundred years. But first, do you give two hoots what I think? Well, thank you -- thank you very much. Now pull up a chair and I'll go into detail. Let's take a look, first, at the present-day picture. What do we see? We see Man -- who only yesterday, in terms of the historic cycle, learned the startling fact that diseases are caused by little beasties called germs -- talking blandly about putting a platform out in space, hopping from there to the moon, and from there to heaven knows where. Man who, a scant five hundred years ago, would take off his jacket and fight you if you told him the world is round. M ove up further, and what do we see -- vast new knowledge, stupendous scientific progress, most of which has been achieved in the last hundred years. And I think you'll agree that one hundred years, when stacked up against the life and death span of worlds, nay, even empires, is a short time indeed. What am I getting at? Just this -- it has happened too quickly; this progress has come far too fast. One of the basic laws of nature, is that of action and reaction. I saw this law function most perceptibly during the years I made my living as a speculator in the Chicago grain markets. There, you understood the law and functioned in rhythm with it, or you lost all your money and stopped eating. Check any old grain chart and you'll see what I mean. Say that wheat is priced at one dollar a bushel and that the situation justifies its going to three dollars. It doesn't just walk up there overnight. In covering the distance from one dollar to three, the price of wheat goes up and comes back, rams up again, and falls away. Always going higher than it went before and never falling as low as the point from which it started, but conforming, all die way up, to the law of action and reaction, until it arrives at its ultimate price. And, even there, we find the prices as being nothing more than a stopping point in a greater cycle. The prices of living are an example -- a halt or decline here and there, but ever higher through the years. T his law underlies almost every visual or abstract interpretation of motion. Rise and fall. Action and reaction. Even in human endeavor, it is apparent. A man begins building a career. That career is made up of a series of successes and failures. It could be charted on a graph as a zigzag line of advances and recessions, but never as a straight line from the bottom to the top. So, applying the law to current history, we have a graph representing technical, economic, in fact general world advancement ramming straight up in a line from # to # -- a line almost vertical. Any experienced grain speculator would take one look at that line and sell everything but the clothes on his back. Of course his timing could be wrong. No man alive can pick a top and say with authority, this is it. Many of them have gone broke trying. But they know the danger signals, and to my way of thinking -- I could be very wrong -- the signals are flying. far too fast and the law of action and reaction has not been repealed. I realize I'm putting myself in the same category as those who started calling the # crash in #. They missed a mile, but in the end they were right because they refused to disregard the inexorable law. I'll probably be accused of shouting gloom from the house tops, but a man has to be honest in his convictions and these are mine. I think, without being accused of crackpotism, we have a perfect right to view human progress over the broadest area of which we are capable. These cycles certainly go far, far behind our recorded history. Therefore, who can say what peaks of great human progress lie buried in voiceless antiquity. Who can say what knowledge has been gained and lost only to be gained again? this, however. That right now, we are at the very peak of all human progress on this planet. But how about the next recession? When it comes, and what form it will take no man can say. Maybe those platforms will be built in our life-span ; or in that of our children ; or our children's children. Or perhaps they will be built by those who must remain unborn for another five thousand years. Anyhow, it's an interesting field for cogitation. And certainly, no one can call me a Pollyanna. pwf up from the horror of Hiroshima came a god. He gave the people hope and for this they killed him -- as they have always killed their gods. and By John Scott Campbell sensed that the moment we came ashore. Extraterritoriality was long gone; we had known that, of course. The days of exploitation, of clubs where Chinese and Burmese and Indian servants waited on Britons and Americans were passed. Pan-Asia had seen to that. This was #. The white man's burden in the east had been upon brovm and yellow shoulders for over sixteen years now, and the Indians and Burmese and Indonesians were ruling themselves, after their fling at communism in the fifties. The initial bitterness which followed the debacle of # had passed, we were glad to see. Porters no longer spat in the faces of white men. They were polite, but we had not been in the city a half hour before we sensed something else. There was an edge to that politeness. It was as Major Reid had written before we Irft San Francisco -- a subtle change had come over Asia in the previous few years. They smiled -- they waited on us -- they bent over backwards to atone for the excesses of the first years of freedom from foreign rule; but through it all was an air of aloofness, of superior knowledge. Baker put it in his typically blunt British way. "The blighters have something up their sleeves, all right. The whole crew of them. Did you notice that rickshaw boy? When I said to take us to the hotel, he answered 'Yes, today I take you'. The Major was right -- there's something in the wind, and its damned serious." We were sitting, surrounded by our luggage, in our suite at the New China Hotel. There were four of us: Llewelyn Baker, Walter Chamberlin, Robert Martin, and and Martin were anthropolcists, and old China hands as well. Chamberlin was a geologist, and I claimed knowledge of zoology. We were here ostensibly as a scientific expedition, and had permission from the Republic of East Asia to do some work on Celebese man, following up the discoveries by Ranee of bones and artifacts on that East Indian island in #. We had another reason for coming at this particular time, although this was not mentioned to the authorities. Our real objective was to find out certain things about New Buddhism, the violently nationalistic religion which was sweeping Pan-Asia. New Buddhism was more than a religion. It was a motivating force of such power that men like Major Reid at the American Embassy were frankly worried, and had communicated their fears to their home governments. The Pan-Asia movement had, at first, been understandable. At first it had been nationalism, pure and simple. The Asiatics were tired of exploitation and western bungling, and wanted to rule themselves. During the communist honeymoon in the early fifties, it was partly underground and partly taken over by the Reds for their own purposes. But through everything it retained a character of its own, and after '# it reappeared as a growing force which was purely oriental. Or at least so it seemed. Our job was, among other things, to find out if Russian control was really destroyed. We had already made several observations. The most obvious was the number of priests. Yellow robed Buddhist priests had always been common, begging rice and coppers in the streets, but in # a new kind appeared. He was younger than his predecessors, and was usually an ex-soldier. And his technique was different. He was a salesman. "Rice -- rice for Buddha," he would say. "Rice for the Living Buddha, to give him strength. Rice for the Great One, that he may grow mighty. Rice for the strength to cast off our bonds." And they had organization. This wasn't any hit or miss revival, started by a crackpot, or by some schemer for his own enrichment. There was direction back of it, and very good direction too. We sensed that it had been Japanese, at least at the start, but with the end of the occupation, we could no longer barge in and investigate officially. Now there were treaties to respect, and diplomatic procedure and all that sort of thing. Instead, we were here to spy. Unofficially, of course. The ambassador was very explicit on that point. We were strictly on our own. If we were caught, there could be no protection. So here we were. Four scientists investigating Celebese man, and trying to find out, on the side, just what was back of New Buddhism. We washed up, had dinner, and presently, as we had expected. Major Reid called. After a few jocular references to anthropology, for the benefit of the waiter, he got down to business. "I'll have to be brief," he said, "because I can't spend too much time with you without stirring up suspicion. You all know the background. They claim that this business is simply a new religion, a revival of Buddhism modeled to fit new conditions. President Tung claims that there is no connection between it and the state. We think differently. We have reason to believe that the direction back of this movement is communism, and that its ultimate object is military attack on the western world. What we don't know is the nature of the proposed attack. Some of us suspect that they are making H-bombs, and have covered up so that we cannot spot them. That's what we must find out. "The headquarters of New Buddhism is on a small volcanic island called Yat, off the east coast of Celebes. Your job is to reach that island and find out what's going on, and then bring the information back. Clear?" We nodded. We had received a similar briefing in Washington, and from a far more distinguished personage than Major Reid, but we felt no need of mentioning this. In such a business, gratuitous information, even to friends, serves no useful end. ington had told us a good many other things, too. In the name of New Buddhism, the priests had been collecting immense quantities of supplies, and on an increasing scale. Tons of foodstuffs had been gathered and then shipped off to an unknown destination. Machinery, lumber, structural steel, canvas by the thousands of yards had been purchased, loaded onto ships and barges, and spirited away. It appeared that the New Buddhists were maintaining a standing army, or perhaps a labor force somewhere east of Borneo, but the picture was very incomplete. Part of the failure of ordinary methods of intelligence may have been due to the supersecrecy of the New Buddhists themselves. It was not difficult to corrupt priests on the lower levels, but all they knew was that certain quotas of food and materials were set for their territory, which were then shipped away to Borneo. The big break had come only a men got through to a barge captain, who had been to the headquarters itself. He identified the location as an island a few miles off the northeast coast of Celebes. It was, he said, highly mountainous -- in fact he believed it to be an extinct volcano, with a water filled crater reached only by a narrow passage from the sea. Boats, he said, could go in and out, but his barge was not among those permitted. He delivered his cargo, three thousand tons of rice and five thousand raw hides, and was then sent on his way. Under questioning, he said that there were many people living on the island -- thousands at least. Most of them lived in barracks among the trees fronting the ocean, but some had special privileges and were allowed to go to the top of the crater rim. Of the activities within the crater our informant knew nothing. At night the clouds were often lit by reflections from there, and once he had heard noises, accompanied by a distinct shaking of the earth, as though blasting were being done at a great depth. This was the extent of our knowledge. We knew the location, but it was up to us to find out the rest. Our departure from Shanghai for the great island of Celebes involved the usual exasperation of delay and red tape. The American Embassy did everything possible to ('xpcdite matters, and brought a little pressure to bear, I think, on the strength of the then impending Amei lean Sixth Loan to China. In any i ase we were at last cleared. and boarded the plane for Celebes. We took one of the six place compartments on the upper deck, and presently had company in the form of two yellow-clad New Buddhist priests. Baker, who had the best command of Chinese, engaged them in conversation. As we had expected, they were a lively interest in Celebes man. That they were here to watch us was obvious. Baker bided his time, and then switched the conversation to New Buddhism. On this subject too the priests were anything but reticent. They described with enthusiasm the great spiritual renaissance that was sweeping all Asia "like a wind, the breath of life from the Living Buddha." Baker asked a few questions about the Buddha, since to show no curiosity about such a life subject might excite suspicion. The priests were ready for them, and gave what was evidently the stock answer: the Living Buddha was the very incarnation of Gautama himself, a spiritual leader who was being groomed to take over the guidance of all mankind, in east and west alike. "Where does the Great One live?" asked Baker, alert for a trap. "In Celebes, where you are going," was the reply. "Oh," said Baker innocently, "Then perhaps it could be arranged for us to meet him?" This, explained the priest, was quite impossible. In due time Buddha would display himself for the world to see and marvel over; meanwhile, while his preparation was yet incomplete, he must remain in seclusion. By now convinced that the presence of the priests was no accident. Baker settled down to the sort of verbal sparring match that he enjoyed. He had been speaking in the Cantonese dialect, but now he abruptly switched to English. "You know," he remarked, "you fellows are using an amazing amount of material at your headquarters. Enough food to keep a good sized standing army." The two priests, who had professed ignorance of English at the start of the conversation, stiffened visibly. Baker returned to Chinese. The priests recovered their composure with some effort. The older replied suavely, "Gossip is a creative art. There is a large monastery at our central temple, and much is needed to maintain its activities." "Truth," said Baker pontifically, "is usually disappointing. The imagination changes a mud hut to a palace, and a sickly priest to a demigod." The two priests inclined their heads slightly at this. We watched their expressions. If Baker's purposely provoking language brought a reaction, it was not visible. But we had learned one thing: they spoke English but preferred that we did not know it. cassar, the Indonesian capital of Celebes, was attended by the usual confusion and delay. Our Buddhist friends vanished with a speed which suggested special consideration, while the man from the American Consulate was still getting our equipment through customs. This business at length completed, we were escorted to a taxi by the attache and whisked up one of the wide avenues of the city without a question as to where we were to stay. Baker and Martin stared out the window with studied ease -- they knew that something was up, but were content to await further developments. Now I noticed something else. The driver of our cab was a European, not a native. I started to frame a question, when, without warning, the car ducked into a side street, swung around two corners and abruptly entered an open doorway in a tall stucco building. Both Walt and I were half out of our seats in alarm, when our guide spoke. "The American Consulate, gentlemen," he said, with the slightest trace of a diplomatic smile. The cab had stopped in the ground floor garage of the consulate, and opening the door was the consul himself. "Good morning. I'm Stimson. Hope Avery didn't give you too wild a ride, but I thought it best not to advertise my interest in you at the front door. Things have changed a bit in the last few days. Well, Avery will show you to your rooms. I'll be in the upstairs study when you're freshened up." There was little to speculate on as we shaved and changed to less rumpled clothes, but we worked over the available data for what it was worth. "Consul takes us in tow," remarked Chamberlin. "That isn't in line with the unofficial status so strongly impressed on us at Washington." "And sneaking us in through the back door isn't according to best diplomatic form, either. Stimson wants to protect us from something, but obviously doesn't want the local constabulary to know." This from Martin. "It seems to me," I ventured, "that they could check the hotels. It shouldn't take them long to put two and two together when we don't show. I'm blessed if I can see what Stimson has to gain from this maneuver." Baker turned from the mirror where he had been adjusting his tie. "Suppose we ask him," he commented. The consul was waiting for us in his study. After the briefest greeting which his official position permitted, he got down to business. "Gentlemen, I've had to pull a diplomatic boner of the first magnitude. I refer to the cloak and dagger method of getting you here. But believe me, it was the only way. They're onto your scheme. If you went to a hotel in New Macassar, you wouldn't be alive tomorrow morning." "But, the taxi -- " began Martin. "It gave us a few hours. If I had sent the consulate car, they'd have us sealed off tight right now. I could keep you safe here, or get you on the Shanghai plane, but you couldn't make another move. As it is, we have perhaps two hours -- with luck." The consul settled back in his chair, evidently gathering his thoughts. We waited, more mystified than before, if that were possible. At length Stimson started again. "You're well briefed on the general situation. Reid gave me the gist of his conversation. But there are some other things that even Reid doesn't know." He opened a folding blotter on his desk and drew out an eight by ten photographic print. "You're aware of the efforts that have been made to look into the crater on Yat. To date we have not succeeded in getting an eye witness to the rim. We have flown over Yat, of course, and have taken pictures from every altitude from # to # feet, but so far they have outsmarted us. They have smoke generators all around the rim, which they fire up night and day whenever the natural clouds lift. We've used every color, including infra red. We've taken stereo pairs, and flash shots at night, but, with one exception, all we've ever gotten are beautiful pictures of clouds and smoke. The exception I have here. It was taken two weeks ago, during a brief break in a heavy storm. Before I say anything more, I'd like to have you look at it and form your own opinions." He placed the print on the desk, facing us, and leaned back while we four crowded around. My first glimpse was disappointing. Fully two thirds of the picture was occupied by clouds. But gradually I made out the details. There seemed n to be several buildings of uncertain size in the lower part, and a fringe of brush extending up to the left. Half visible through the mist were several structures which seemed to me, in comparison to the larger buildings, like chicken houses or perhaps rabbit hutches. No humans were in sight, evidently because of the storm. But in the center of the picture was the thing which fixed our attention from the first, leaving the other details for later scrutiny.This was an immense human figure, lying on its side with the head pillowed on its hands in the attitude of the colossal figures of the reclining Buddha found in the mountains of China. The body was partly covered by a robe, but whether this was part of the figure or a canvas protection against the rain, was difficult to tell. Only the head, hands and feet showed. The face was partly in shadow, but enough could be seen to identify the typical Buddha countenance: closed eyes and lips curled in an enigmatic smile. picture for a good minute, taking in the details, while Stimson watched us. Then Baker looked up. "What is it?" he asked. "Before I tell you our guesses," replied the consul, "I'd like to hear your reactions." "It would appear that the New Buddhists are doing the obvious -- setting up a Buddhist temple. Although, except for the statue, you'd never guess it." This from Chamberlin. Martin squinted closely at the print. "Yes, the buildings look more like airship hangars than a temple." Stimson raised his eyebrows slightly. "That's an interesting observation," he commented. "Wish there were some humans, or something else to give a scale," said Baker. "For all we can tell, it could be anything from doll houses and a life sized statue, all the way up to an air base, and a reclining Buddha to end all reclining Buddhas." There was an expectant pause. Stimson, seeing that we had nothing more to add, cleared his throat, glanced briefly out of the window behind his chair, and hunched forward. "This picture was made from an F-#A, modified for photo reconnaissance. The plane was on a routine flight from Singapore to Mindanao, over a solid deck of clouds. The pilot swung south over Yat just out of curiosity. He approached the island at # feet, using radar, and was about to pass over when he spotted a hole in the overcast. Time was # -- just sunset -- but the edge of the crater was well lighted, although the bottom was in deep shadow. More important, the smoke generators had been turned off. Obviously the clouds had just parted, and would close in again in a minute. The presence of the F-#A at this particular instant was just one of those pilot realized this. He put the ship into a dive and ordered his photographer to ready the cameras. "The plane approached Yat at a speed above Mach #, so there was no audible warning, and evidently the island's radar was off, for the surprise was complete. Within # seconds the F-#A closed level just over the crater and shot past with only a thin stratus layer between it and ground. Time over the crater was hardly # seconds, and neither pilot nor observer saw anything, but the synchronous vertical camera was operating and four flashes were made during the middle four seconds. Then the plane was in the clouds again at a # degree climb and a dozen miles towards the Philippines before anyone on Yat could even get outdoors. "As might be expected there was a considerable protest over this vicn lation of Celebese territory, although oddly, it was bas on moral grounds rather than national integrity. The protest was signed by the Lama of Macassar, and demanded neither indemnity nor punishment of the pilot, but asked merely that incense be burned in Washington to appease Buddha. Now of course the Lama isn't that naive, or devout. As you may know, Phobat Rau was educated at Hartrained and tough statesman who knows his way around anywhere, and doesn't believe the theological hogwash in Pan-Buddhism any more than I do. So it was a question of getting behind his motive. Of course, it could be a cover, but our final guess was that the protest was really made for the benefit of the faithful in Asia. This opinion was strengthened, at least as far as I am concerned, about a fortnight ago when Rau attended the British Embassy reception for Lord Hayes. He didn't avoid me, but actually seemed to single me out as a foil for some of his witty small talk. Asked if I was much of a student of Buddhist architecture and carvijs, and if I had seen the Kyoto Buddha, or the reclining Buddha off'the Yangtze. He was fishing, of course, but I played it dumb, and presently he gave up. "Well, there you have it, at least as far as the picture is concerned. The Buddhists were considerably upset, for they tightened up security all over the islands. And then you came into the scene. Naturally nobody believed that you were just after Celebese man, but the governor granted permission -- so easily, in fact, that we got suspicious. Americans are no match for oriental subtlety, but we do have a few tricks, one of whom is a code clerk in the Macassar foreign office, and from her we learned that you were set for the preferred treatment: to be let in easily, and then knocked off in some painless way. Hence the taxi, and the sneak ride here." He paused. "That's the situation to date, gentlemen. Any questions?" Martin had been studying the photograph. "At what altitude was this taken?" The consul shook his head. "The autorecorder was off. The observer forgot to set it, in the rush." "Well, couldn't they estimate?" "They did, but it's obviously way off. The pilot swears that he levelled at #, but that would make these buildings a quarter of a mile long, and the Buddha at least five hundred feet. Unless you want to believe that they have another Willow Run on Yat, you can't take that figure." Another pause. Finally Baker spoke. "You said you had a guess." "Yes, I have." Stimson seemed reluctant to speak. "But it sounds so damned fantastic I hate to tell it to you -- well, to be short, I don't think that this Buddha is a statue." We all sat up. "Then what is it?" This from Martin. "I mean, not a statue of stone or masonry in the usual sense of the term. I think that it is a portable image of Buddha -- an inflated gas bag like they use in the Easter parade. I think they intend to float it in the air -- perhaps tow it -- to impress the faithful. If the thing's really # feet long, it may be a blimp or a rigid airship with its own motors. But, whatever the details, I think our mystery is just a piece of propaganda for Neo-Buddhism, although a damned good one, from the native standpoint." We all relaxed. This was an anticlimax. Stimson had built us up to something -- just what, we were ntft sure -- and then had pricked the bubble. "Well, it sounds reasonable," Baker finally remarked, returning the print to Stimson, "although not particularly dangerous, and certainly not worth risking our necks to spy on. However, I don't think it's good enough to explain all of the supplies that have gone into Yat." The consul nodded. "Yes, that's the rub. If they hadn't taken such pains to conceal the thing, I'd be inclined to call it just a cover for something else." "Maybe it still is," said Baker. Stimson looked at us carefully, as though making up his mind. "That is where you gentlemen come in," he said finally. "I have reason to believe that our picture has tipped their hand, that they are going ahead with whatever they have planned in the next few days. Someone's got to get to Yat first -- someone who can observe intelligently, and speak the language. My staff is all clerical, and Aere is no You're the only ones available." He paused. We looked at each other, and then at Baker. He cleared his throat a couple of times, took another squint at the photo, and then spoke. "Speaking for myself, Stimson, when do we leave?" "That goes for me too," said Martin. Chamberlin and I nodded. Stimson seemed relieved. "I'd hoped to hear that. In fact, I'd have been considerably embarrassed if you gentlemen hadn't come through, because I have a seaplane waiting right now to take you to Yat." n T he next two hours passed swiftly. Once the decision was made, we all became so involved in the details of preparation as to have no more time for reflection, either upon the nature of what we should find on the island of Yat, or the possible personal consequences of our expedition. First Stimson briefed us on the geography of our objective. Yat was a volcanic island, one of a group strung across the shallow sea east of Borneo and north of Celebese. It was almost circular, with a diameter of about seven miles, and was entirely covered by a dense tropical forest. The principal feature of the island was an extinct volcanic crater, rising to an altitude of # feet, at the east end of the island. The crater measured about two miles across, and perhaps a third of its area was filled with water from a narrow channel leading to the sea. Photos taken before the closure of Yat by the Indonesians showed a typical Malay isle : cocoanut and mango plantations, with forests of gum and mahogany climbing and trance channel was narrow and quite deep and the interior lake constituted an ideally sheltered anchorage. On the east coast the land rose steeply in a series of mossy cliflfs over which waterfalls poured, while to the west, away from the volcano, plantations stretched inland from the coral beaches. As we studied the pictures and charts, Stimson briefed us on the course of action. "Your first objective is to find out what they're doing in that crater. Are they building some new weapon, or training an army, or what. You'll have Geiger counters and a krypton analyser of course, although the analyser is no guarantee in detecting fissionable material production. Then we want to know what their plans are, particularly in the next few days or weeks. Finally, just who is involved in it? Is New Buddhism entirely Asiatic, as they claim, or has Russia cut herself in too? "You will be landed on the west coast of the island just after simset. The east, with its cliff and entrance channel is undoubtedly too well guarded, but on the west side, with four miles of flat country, they may depend on defense in depth, so that you'll have a better chance of getting past the beach. The plane will come in low, make a landing just off the breakers and drop you off in rubber swim suits. It will then taxi to the north of the island and make a fairly long stop, to divert attention, since it will certainly be picked up by radar. Your job will be to swim ashore, bury the rubber suits, and make your way east to the crater. If you reach the rim, see what you can, and report by radio at any hour. If you don't make it to the top, observe as much as possible on the island, make your reports, and rendezvous with the plane at your landing point at # the next day. If you miss that time, a plane will be back daily at the same time for four days. After that, we will assume that you have been caught." We were driven to the harbor in the same disreputable taxicab which had brought us to the consulate a few hours before. Time was a little past three in the afternoon as the seaplane roared down a lane in the swarm of junks, tramp freighters and warships of the Indonesian state. We hoped that we were not too well observed; there was no way of knowing until we arrived on Yat, and the learning might not be too pleasant. The flight northeast from New Maceissar was uneventful. We passed over a blue tropical sea, dotted with island jewels. For a time the low coast of the great island of Celebes made a blue haze on the eastern horizon, and then we had the ocean to ourselves. At dusk there were still two hundred miles between us and Yat, a flight of about forty minutes. Pulling down the shades, lest the cabin lights reveal us to a chance Indonesian patrol, We busied ourselves with packing the portable radio equipment and putting on our watertight clothing. The last fifty miles were made on the deck -- in fact, once or twice the hull actually touched a wavetop. The pilot extinguished the cabin lights and we peered ahead for a fiit glimpse of our objective. The sky was clear, but the moon would not rise until nine, so that the only indication we had that Yat was at hand was a slight deepening in the tropic night ahead and to the right, which the pilot said marked Mount Kosan, the ancient crater. But no sooner had we gotten this vaguely orienting information, than the flaps were lowered, the plane slowed to under # miles per hour, and we touched the water. The co-pilot opened the side door, and we crouched together peering out. The plane taxied over a choppy cross sea toward the shadow of the island, while we squinted through the salt spray. Presently the engines dropped to idle, and the rumble of surf became audible. "Pracrically dead calm tonight," said the co-pilot reassuringly. "Wind usually dies out at sunset. You won't have any trouble getting through. Just watch your step when you're adiore," "That's always good advice for sailors," remarked Baker. As the plane lost headway, the white line of surf and the silhouettes of cocoa palms took shape. Evidently the plantations came right to the water's edge at this point, a circumstance for which we were all thankful. I was just turning to Martin with some remark about this when the pilot called softly and urgently. "We're as close as we can drift safely. Jump, and good luck." "Righto, and thanks," came Baker's voice, and then a splash. I was next. I took a deep breath, and clutched my rubber covered bundle of radio gear. I leaped out into darkness. An instant later I was gasping for air beside Baker. Two more splashes in quick succession and then the engines picked up speed, the dark shape of the wing overhead moved off, and we were alone. F or a moment we swam in circles, getting our bearings. Baker had removed his glasses for the jump, and so we depended mainly on Martin for directions. There was really no need for worry, however, for it soon became apparent that a strong onshore current was bringing us in to the breakers at a good clip. The line of phosphorescence marking their crests was now hardly a hundred yards away. With Martin in the lead we began to swim. Presently one of the swells picked us up quite gently, moved us forward, and then suddenly exploded into a foamy torrent which tossed us head over heels and left us gasping and spitting sand on the beach. As quickly as possible we got into the shelter of the first ranks of trees. Here we dug a hole at the base of a great cocoanut palm and buried the rubber suits and cases of radio gear, along with a small vial of radium D. This had been provided for us, along with the Geiger counter, by the thorough Mr. Stimson as a means for locating our cache when we returned, if we should miss our bearings. It was # : # when this chore was completed. We had an hour and twenty-three minutes to moonrise. Turning inland, we walked in silence through the grove for a few hundred yards, and then came upon a road. This we recognized, from our map study, as the main coastal highway. We hurried across, rather elated at the progress we were making and a little surprised at the lack of fences or other protective devices on the island. Things seemed just too easy. On the other side of the road we encountered a rice paddy, which made the going a good deal more difficult. But after about ten minutes of sloshing through this, we came to a diagonal road, or rather path which seemed to be going our way. Thanks to this, by # : # we felt the ground rising underfoot and sensed a darker bulk in the shadows ahead, which could only be Mount Kosan itself. Here we came to our first fence, and affair of steel posts and barbed wire, which appeared to be a guard against cattle, but hardly more. After inspecting one of the posts for signs of electrification, we crawled under the bottom wire and started up the slope. "Are you sure we're on the right island?" asked Chamberlin. "From the security measures I don't think we're going to find anything more secret than a copra plantation." Baker shushed him, and whispered back, "We're on the right island, but that's the only thing that's right. This is simply too easy to be true." "Well," said Martin, "Stimson could be all wet. Maybe they're just sculping a king sized Buddha after all." The slope had now steepened considerably, and further conversation died out in the effort of climbing. The volcano was heavily forested all the way up with mahogany and guru trees, and a dense undergrowth of vines and ferns entangled our feet. Twice we came upon rapidly flowing streams. We were perhaps two thirds of the way up when the moon appeared. Its light didn't penetrate very far into the dense foliage, but it did enable us to make out the top of the mountain, which took the form of a vine covered outcrop of lava. We altered our course slightly, and at #:# P.M. the forest fell away and we faced a rough wall of rock some two hundred feet in height. Before tackling this last obstacle, we paused for a rest and some hot coffee from the thermos which was included in our equipment. Then, at five minutes past ten, we started the final ascent. The cliff proved to be more of a climb than we had anticipated, and the time was close to eleven before we pulled ourselves up over the last boulder and could look across the crater to the other rim. The last few feet we negotiated with the greatest caution. Martin, I think, was first, and he pulled himself on his belly across to the beginning of the inner slope. He lay quietly for a half minute, then muttered something under his breath which sounded vaguely like 'Til be damned", and made way for Baker, who was next. I squeezed in beside him, and so we got a look into the crater at the same time. Baker, being a very self-contained man, made no audible comment, but I must have, for the sight which met our eyes was certainly the last thing I had expected to see. The crater of Mount Kosan was filled with steel and concrete structures of gargantuan size, and of the most amazing shapes I had ever seen. I say amazing, but T do not mean in the sense of unfamiliar, on the contrary these incredible objects had the commonest shapes. Had it not been for trees and normal buildings to give the scene a scale, I would have sworn that we were looking into a picnic grounds a hundred feet across instead of a two mile diameter plain ringed by mountains # feet high. The buildings seen In the aerial photo occupied only a small part of the crater -- all of the other structures must have been concealed by clouds. the rim dropped vertically into deep shadows, as the moonlight reached but half the crater. A thousand yards west of us, vhere the light first touched the floor, we could make out several clumps of brush or small trees, among which was set a rectangular concrete surface measuring perhaps four hundred feet square, and resting on hundred foot steel columns. Near this, and partly supported by the side of the mountain was what appeared to be a great table, of roughly the same area, but standing on trussed columns the height of a thirty story building. In front of this was a chair, if by chair you understand me to mean a boxlike building twenty stories high, with a braced back rising as far again. A half mile along the rim was an even larger structure whose dimensions could only be measured in fractions of miles, which resembled nothing more than a vast shed built against the cliff. Next my attention was attracted to a number of objects lying upon the platform immediately west of us. One of these appeared to be a steel bowl-like container some thirty feet deep and a hundred in diameter, like the storage tanks used in oil fields. Nearby was an open tank measuring perhaps fifty feet in each dimension, and beside this were the most startling of all -- several hundred foot pieces erf built-up structural steel resembling knife, fork and spoon. In retrospect, the deduction from this evidence was obvious, but as we stared down at this spectacle, a sort of numbness took hold of our minds. As a later comparison of impressions verified, none of us came remotely near guessing the truth in those incredible seconds. For what seemed like minutes we just stared, and then the spell was broken. Walt had squeezed in beside me, where he gave vent to a low whistle of amazement. Baker shushed him, and then shifted to a better position, in so doing knocking a rock from the ledge. This started a small avalanche which went clattering down the cliff with a sound, to our hypersensitive ears, like thunder. We all froze in our places, abruptly aware that the moon illuminated us like actors in a spotlight. For a good minute we waited tense, and then gradually relaxed. Baker started to say something when without warning the ground beneath us shook, starting a score of rockslides. We recoiled from the edge and braced for a stronger earthquake shock. Then suddenly Baker uttered a hoarse cry. Me was pointing -- pointing down into the blackness at our feet where our eyes had as yet been unable to pi'iiotrate. Something was there, something vast and dim and shapeless like a half inflated airship. Then a part of it was detached and came rapidly for any detail to be seen -- our only imjression was of a vast white Lolumn large as the Washington monument which swung up into the moonlight and then was withdrawn. At the same time the ground quivered anew, starting fresh slides. We blinked stupidly for several seconds, and then became conscious for the first time of the sound. It was like a vast cavernous wheeze at first, and then a series of distinct wet thuds followed by a prolonged gurgling rumble. If these descriptive phrases sound strange and awkward, let me give assurance that they are as nothing to the eerie quality of the noises themselves. We lay glued to our rocky perch, hardly daring to breathe, until the last windy sigh had died away. Baker found his voice first. "Good God, it's something alive!" Chamberlin tried to reason. "It can't be -- why, it's two hundred feet high -- it's just a gas bag, like Stimson said. It's -- " He stopped. The thing had moved again, more rapidly and with purpose. The great column rose, then pressed down into the ground and pushed the main bulk up out of the shadows. There was a moment of confusion while our senses tried to grasp shape and scale at the same time, and then it all came into focus as the thing arose into the light. At one instant we were sane humans, trying to make out a great billowy form wallowing in the darkness below. In the next instant we were madmen, staring into a human face a hundred feet wide, that peered back at us from the level of the clifftop! For a second we were all still -- we four, and that titanic placid oriental face hanging before us in the moonlight. Then the great eyes blinked sleepily and the thing started to move toward us. I cannot recall in detail what happened. I remember someone screamed, an animal cry of pure terror. It may have been me, although Baker claims to be the guilty one. In any case the four of us arose as one and plunged headfirst off our rock into the tangle of brush at the top of the cliff. I think that only the vines saved us from certain death in that first mad instant. I know that we were wrestling with them for what seemed like an eternity. They wrapped around my legs, tangled in my arms. They were like clutching hands, holding me back in a nightmare-like struggle, while the thing in the crater came closer. Then abruptly I realized that they were hands, human hands seizing us, pulling us back from the cliff and then skillfully tieing us up. It was all over in a moment. The madness was ended. We were once more rational humans, tied hand and foot, and propped against the rocky ledge in front of a dozen yellow-robed men. For a time we just breathed heavily -- ourselves and our brown skinned captors alike. Then one of the latter spoke. "You can stand now, yes?" Baker struggled to his feet in reply. The rest of us did likewise, aided not unkindly, by the yellowrobed men. Baker found his voice. "Thank you," he said. In the brightening moonlight we looked more carefully at our captors. They were of small stature, evidently Japanese, and, by their costume. all priests. Baker laughed briefly and glanced at the rest of us. "It would appear," he said dryly, "that we have been taken." m T he leader of the priests indicated by a gesture that he wished us to move along a narrow trail cut in the vines along the rim. I attempted to get another look at the horror within the crater, but the ledge of rock down which we had just fallen stood in the way. We were guided into a pitch black trail which descended steeply into the forest on the outer slope of Mount Kosan. I lost track of direction almost at once. The trail zigzagged a couple of times, and then I sensed that we were in a covered passage. After a few more steps and a turn, a light appeared ahead, to show we were walking in a concrete lined tunnel. Our captors had split themselves into two groups, a half dozen ahead and an equal number behind. Soon there appeared a metal door in one wall, which proved to be the entrance to an elevator. We all squeezed in, and were taken down a distance which surely must have brought us near to the crater floor itself. The door then opened, and again we were escorted along a concrete passage. There were many turns. Our captors paused before a narrow door with a tiny barred window. This was unlocked, we were directed to enter, and the door clanked shut behind us. For the first few minutes no one had anything to say. We examined the interior of our cell, but found nothing more remarkable than concrete, a small ventilator hole near the ceiling, and a wooden bench along the wall opposite the door. Martin found his voice first. "A human being," he said slowly, "as big as the Woolworth Building!" Chamberlin, apparently still involved in his last abortive try at reason said, "But it's impossible. The laws of mechanics -- why the biggest dinosaurs were only eighty feet long, and they had to be supported by water. It's a mechanical device, I tell you." "It could have been an illusion," I ventured. "Perhaps an image projected on a fog bank, or something similar -- " Neither Walt nor I were very convincing -- not with the memory of that face fresh in our minds. We all fell silent again. Several minutes passed, when abruptly we became conscious of a movement of the floor, slight but repeated with regularity. A shake, a pause of six or eight seconds, then another shake. Baker stood on the bench and put his ear to the ventilator. He heard nothing. The movement came again. Shake, pause, shake, pause, like some distant and monstrous machine. I was reminded of the small earthquakes felt in the vicinity of a heavy drop hammer. Shake, pause, shake, pause, and then a heavier jolt accompanied by a distinct thud. After that, quiet. "Obviously," Baker said, "they knew all about us." He was evidently thinking out loud. "Probably picked us up on the beach, and then just let us go on, clearing out the guards ahead, and keeping near enough to see that we didn't use the radio. Why? Maybe to find out how much we knew about the place already. I daresay they know one thing now: we never expected to find -- what we did. Which brings us to our Buddha. The big question is, is it mechanical or -- alive? He paused. "I don't know -- none of us can know yet -- but, I'm inclined to believe the latter. Cady, what's your opinion?" I had forgotten for the moment that I was a zoologist. To tell the truth, the whole thing had been a little outside of the type of specimen I was familiar with. "Its movements were lifelike," I replied. "They suggest muscular action rather than mechanical drive. But, as Walt says, it's just not possible. Nature has placed a limit on the size of living creatures. The strength of bones, the energy requirements, the osmotic pressures needed to move fluids through tissue. Besides, where could it come from? There have been giants -- eight, ten, maybe up to twelve feet -- but this thing is of a different order of magnitude. It must weigh can't believe that it's alive." Martin and Chamberlin had a few more remarks of the same nature, and then the conversation died away. We waited. Eventually they would come -- the yellowrobed ones. When they did, we might learn more. I had little doubt as to our ultimate fate, but in the dulled condition of my senses, I didn't seem particularly to care. My watch had been smashed in the struggle, so that I had no idea of how long they kept us in the celL It could not have been too many hours, for the elementary needs of nature had only begun to assert themselves when the sound of a key came from the door. We all stood up. It was our conductor of last night, the one who spoke pidgin English. "Good morning, gentlemens," he said with a bow. "You spend nice night, yes? Get plenty sleep?" We did not reply. Still smiling politely, he beckoned. "Now please to come with me. Head Lama talk to you now." interminable concrete corridors of that subterranean city, but this time we came out into a hall illuminated by natural daylight. The walls here were neatly plastered, and the doors more ornamental. "Getting near the high brass," murmured Chamberlin. The last hall was terminated by a window and balcony, beyond which the green of a distant hillside could be seen. Before we reached diis, however, our guide stopped at a heavy aluminum door and directed us into a sort of anteroom, occupied by uniformed guards and a male receptionist. A few words were exchanged in Japanese, and the guards quickly and expertly frisked us, although this had already been done once. This ceremony over, another door was opened and we were admitted to a large and sunny office, whose big windows gave a panoramic view of the whole crater. Our eyes were so dazzled by the sudden burst of light, and our curiosity was so great to see that fantastic place by daylight, that we did not at once see the man who sat behind a desk opposite the windows, watching us with an expression of high amusement. Baker first noticed him. "Phobat Rau! So you're back of this, after all!" The other stood up. He was a short man, evidently Burmese, and wore a tan military uniform. His smile revealed a bonanza of gold teeth, while his thick lensed specshine streaming in through the windows. "It is a great pleasure to have you here. Professor Baker, although there is in the circumstances some cause for regret. But all that in its time. What do you think of our Buddha?" As he spoke. Baker was glancing about the room, and I saw that his eye had alighted upon an instrument just bdhind Rau's desk. A second look showed it to be a tape recorder, with the operating lamp on. "Until we have more data," replied Baker, "our views are still as you have them recorded." Phobat Rau laughed delightedly. "You're a good observer, Professor. Yes, I must confess I was curious about your reactions to our charge. So you doubt that he is alive?" Baker nodded. "Under the circumstances last night, there was every chance for a mistake, or a hoax." "In that case, perhaps you would like a second look. He's right across the valley now, having his breakfast." We hastened to the window. Rau's oflBce, we found, was in a sort of cliff house perched half way up the northern side of the crater, and commanded a view of the entire area, now brightly illuminated by the morning sunlight. We easily identified the enormous furniture of last night, against the west cliff about a mile away. But we had little interest in these structures, monstrous as they were. For, sitting cross-legged on the groimd before the low table, was the giant. At that distance he did not look so huge -- in fact, with an effort we could almost ignore scale and perspective and imagine that he was a normal human fifty feet distant. He appeared a typical young Japanese, his hair cut long in the old stj'le, and wearing a sleeveless tunic like the statues of Buddha. His face was smooth and serene, and he was eating a white pasty looking substance from his great steel dish, using a big spoon. Even as we watched, he finished the meal and stood up, causing the whole building to sway slightly. He glanced about for a moment, his eye lingering briefly in our direction, and then he walked in a leisurely way to the lagoon, where he bent over and rinsed out his utensils. Returning to the table, he placed them carefully in the position we had noted last night. He then straightened to his full height, raised his great arms far up into the morning air and began a series of earth snaking calisthenics. After about ten minutes of this he walked over to the leanto structure, entered and closed a curtain behind him. Rau, who had been watching us with great amusement, offered an explanation. "His reading room. Books on his scale would be a bit difficult to make, so he uses microfilm and a projector. The microfilm," he added, "is on eight by ten plates, and the screen is two hundred feet square." We returned to the desk and took the seats Rau indicated. "So now," said our host, "you would like to hear a word of explanation, perhaps?" "Several, if you can spare the time," answered Baker with a dryness equal to Rau's. "It all began," began Phobat Rau, "on a beautiful summer's day in #, August #, I believe, was the exact date. Perhaps you recall what happened on that day, in the city of Hiroshima. If not, I will refresh your memories. A bomb was dropped on that day, a new type of bomb. It caused a great deal of destruction, and killed tens of thousands of people. Some died at once from the blast and heat, but many more, who had escaped apparently uninjured, developed serious illness days later and died. The cause you know, of course. It was called radiation injury, the internal destruction of cell structure by gamma rays emitted by the bomb. "Many strange things happened in that blast. In some, injury was confined to particular parts of the body, as the hair. Others were made sterile, in fact, the reproductive function and apparatus seemed particularly susceptible to the rays. In many cases, the genes -- those vital units within the cell which determine growth and structure and all physical and mental characteristics -- the genes were altered, so that children grew abnormally, with deformities or mental sickness. "But these things you well know. Afterwards biologists and physicians and geneticists came from aU parts of the world to study the effects of the atomic bomb, and the flow of learned papers on this subject is not ended even now." T he speaker paused, as if inviting some comment or question. Seeing that we intended to remain silent, he resumed. "There was one case, however, which was not studied by western scientists. In many respects, it was the most interesting of all, for the bomb blast and the accompanying deluge of gamma radiation occurred just at the instant of conception. As usual, damage was sustained by the genes, but this damage was of a peculiar and highly special sort. The only gene affected, apparently, was the one controlling growth, although, as you will see presently, other structural and chemical changes took place without which the growth could never have occurred. "The infant involved was a male, named Kazu Takahashi. He was bom prematurely on March #, #, with a weight of fourteen pounds six ounces. The parents were well to do, and the infant was given the best of care, first in a private hospital, and later in its own home. "During the first few days of life, little Kazu was apparently normal, except for his prematureness and a rather great weight for a sevenmonth infant. And then the change began. His nurse first noticed an increasing appetite. He cried constantly and would be silent only when feeding. He emptied nursing bottles in a few seconds, after he learned to pull off the nipple, and was soon consuming a quart of milk every hour. The nurse humored him, in order to keep him quiet, and presently became afraid to tell either the parents or the doctor just how much milk her charge was drinking. As the days passed and no ill effects developed, she became less worried, although the daily milk ration had to be increased twice, to # quarts a day on the sixth day. "Kazu doubled his weight in the first eleven days, and at the end of two weeks tipped the scales at # pounds. His pink tender skin was now rapidly becoming normal in color and texture, and he was behaving more and more like an ordinary child, although already of startling size. By the fourth week he was drinking # quarts of milk a day and weighed # pounds. The parents -- by now thoroughly alarmed -- called in the doctor, who at once realized the cause of the abnormality. He could offer no suggestions, however, save to continue feeding at a rate to keep the child quiet. This, by the sixth week. soared to the incredible ure of # quarts a day to feed a baby now five feet tall and weighing # pounds. At this point the Takahashi family felt that their problem was getting beyond them, and being Buddhists, they appealed to the local temple -- it was not in Hiroshima, but at a nearby town -- for assistance. The priests took the child in, after a generous contribution had been made by father Takahashi, and for a time the embarrassing matter seemed solved. The Takahashis went on a three weeks vacation to the south coast of Honshu, and all was peaceful, externally at least. "When the family returned, they found a note under the door urgently requesting their presence at the temple. When they arrived, they were met by a highly agitated chief priest. Something had to be done, he said. Things were getting out of hand. He then took them to the nursery. Here they beheld a baby that would have been seven feet eight inches tall if it could stand, and which had weighed in that morning on the platform scales in the temple kitchen, at # pounds. After hearing the details of the milk bill, father Takahashi wrote out another check and departed hurriedly. "After the passage of three more weeks, a delegation from the temple again waited upon Mr. Takahashi, with the news that his son now measured # feet # inches in length, weighed # pounds, and consumed the entire output of a local dairy. They politely requested that he take care of his own infant. Mr. Takahashi as politely refused, and at this point bowed out of ottir story completely." Phobat Rau hesitated again and inquired if his statistics were boring us. Baker glanced out of the window and replied that while he ordinarily did not have much appreciation of figures of this kind, under the circumstances they had a certain interest. Rau smiled briefly and continued. "The summer of # was one of increasing difficulty for the temple. By the beginning of July Kazu weighed # pounds and cried with a voice like a wounded bull. A ' number of trustworthy medical men examined him, and concurred that his only abnormality was size. In bodily proportions he was quite ordinary, and, for a Syh month baby, his mental development was, if anything, a bit ahead of normal. The priests took in their belts, appointed eight of the strongest as nursemaids, and wondered where it would all end. "It was at this point that a member of the Buddhist priesthood from Burma happened to pass through the neighborhood and heard of the infant. After being sworn to secrecy; even from other members of his order, he was allowed to view little Kazu. Now this priest, whose name I might as well admit was Phobat Rau, had perhaps a bit more imagination than some others, and when he looked upon the little monster, he was struck by an idea which was to grow like Kazu himself." "The Living Buddha," murmured Baker, "Ye Gods, what a symbol." Rau nodded like a schoolteacher. "A symbol, and more. A machine to rebuild the world, or conquer it!" B aker chose to ignore this leading remark. He wanted more of the story. "So you took him over?" "Well, it was not so easy as that. You see, I was only a young priest then, and had no resources to undertake such a project. But the more I thought of the possibilities, the more sure I was. But first I had to convince others, and time was short. The priests were near to their limit, and were about to appeal to the Americans. I secured their promise to wait until I could return to Burma, and then I flew to Bangkok, to Rangoon, to every center of Buddhism where I was known. It was a sales trip, you might say, and for a time I thought that I had failed. But there were also forces working for me. The world was uncertain. The communists were at the start of their triumphal sweep over Asia, and the leaders of our faith foresaw what lay ahead. On the first of August, #, a delegation of priests from eight Buddhist countries journeyed to Japan to view Kazu, who was now a lusty ## months old, # feet long and of # pounds weight. He was in fine health, and when he slept the resemblance to the infant Buddha was startling. You gentlemen are worldly men, and I pride myself upon freedom from the more naive illusions of my faith, but perhaps you can try to imagine that our feelings were not entirely those of ambitious schemers -- that perhaps within us was some higher motive for the step we took. Our poor suffering Asia was in deeper misery than ever before, for atop her own famine and war had come also the troublesof the our deluded countrymen were taking arms against their brothers. Confused by a glib ideology, they were daily turning more from the religion of their fathers. Although we did not speak it, we all felt inwardly that perhaps there was a purpose in this great infant -- that, though we made promises with tongue in cheek, perhaps a miracle would occur to fulfill them. "And so we arranged to transport Kazu Takahashi from Japan to a safe location where he might grow to manhood, where he might be suitably educated to take the place that we would prepare for him. The details of this move were not difficult to arrange. A special traveling crib # feet long was built, and in this by truck, lighter and motor junk he was carried by easy stages to this island. Here we established a great monastery, surrounded by rice and fruit plantations. Here we brought physicians and scholars to care for him and plan his education, and we built a nursery to accommodate his increasing bulk. "We did not know, of course, what his final size would be. We kept careful records of his growth, but even after the first year he was not more than ten times the normal height. But year by year we had to revise our estimates, for his growth soon accelerated beyond our wildest expectations. For a time indeed we feared that it would never stop and that he would die of starvation when the world could no longer feed him. For a time also we were sure diat he would never be able to stand, through the action of simple mechanical laws relating to weight and the size of bones, but apparently nature has provided a marvelous compensation, for his bones, as revealed by X-rays, are of a density and strength equal to that of steel. "His feeding was always a problem, although fortunately its increase was not beyond our ability to organize and plan. At first we supplied him from plantations on Yat and on neighboring islands. Then we were forced to organize NeoBuddhism as an implement to solicit contributions of food and money. Perforce we took many into partial confidence, but the complete story was known only to those on Yat. "On his first birthday Kazu was ## feet long and weighed # pounds. By his second birthday he could walk, and now surpassed all land animals save the monsters of the Jurassic age, with a height to #I feet and a weight of # pounds. During #, while the communists were overrunning China, our Buddha grew from # to # feet. In June of #, while the world watched the flames of war kindle in Korea, we saw him pound scale. In the year of # also we built his first schoolroom and developed the system of projected pictures and letters used in his education. "In #, Buddha's increasing appetite combined with the inroads made by the communists upon our territory brought a crisis. He was now # feet tall, weighed seven # men. In spite of all our efforts, his food supply was dwindling and, worse, the communists were becoming suspicious. And so we were forced to a decision. We had to appeal to the western world. But to whom? To America, or to Russia? You all know the situation in #, the time of the false peace. We turned to Russia. They sent a commission to investigate, and then acted with dispatch. Russia would feed our Buddha, but on a condition; Neo-Buddhism must sponsor communism. "We had no choice. Now that the secret was out, Russia had Yat at its mercy. So we agreed, but with one reservation. We alone should direct the education of Kazu. To this Russia agreed. Perhaps they considered that it was unimportant. Perhaps they thought that Kazu was an idiot, useful only as a symbol. But they agreed, and so his education continued in the tradition of Buddhist scholarship. He is well read, gentlemen. He knows the classics of China, and of India, and of the west also. I myself taught him English. At the request of our sponsors, he has studied Russian. He is still young, but he has an inquiring mind. When he takes his true place in the world, he may not always be the tool of the Kremlin. But of these things even I am not given to know." Rau paused, and indicated the window. Buddha was emerging from his leanto. "Look well, gentlemen. There stands the hope of Asia. There is the Living Buddha himself. He is only # years of age, but he stands # feet high, and weighs # pounds. At first he will be but a symbol, but soon he will be much more. The time of compromise, I promise you, will not last forever." Rau stopped. We waited for him to resume, but instead, he pressed a button on his desk. Immediately several members of the guard entered. Rau now addressed us in a new voice. "Gentlemen, you probably wonder why I have spoken so frankly of all of this. To be candid, to a certain extent I wonder also. Perhaps it is to get it off my chest, as you say. Perhaps it is just pride in what I have done. But whatever the reason, the consequences for you are regrettable. Your spying trip to Yat alone is sufficient for death ; what I have told you makes your return a complete impossibility. I am sorry, particularly for you. Baker. We shall do it as humanely as possible. Good day." The guards, as upon a signal, closed in on us. For a second I thought insanely of flight, or a plunge through the great windows to certain death on the crags below. But there was no chance. Before any thought could be translated into action we were back in the corridor, escorted by an augmented guard of priests, on our way back to our cell, and death. A death that would be -- as "humane as possible". IV after the steel door had clicked shut that the full realization of our predicament came to us. Rau's story had been so fascinating, and his manner so rational and civilized that we all had forgotten that he was of a race and ideology opposed to all that we stood for, and that we were spies caught red-handed in the innermost shrine of Neo-Buddhisrn. Even after twenty years of cold war, all of our civilized instincts rose against the idea that a suave brilliant intellectual like Phpbat Rau could so cold bloodedly order our deaths. But the awakening was at hand. If we doubted Rau's intentions, one look at the cold Mongol faces of the guards was enough to dispel any hope. Baker tried to sum it up. "No use trying to argue with him. Fact is, we won't even see Rau again. We could, of course, simply call it quits and wait for them, but I'd rather fight it out. Anyone have an idea?" Martin hopped up on the bench and studied the ventilator. He reached one arm in as far as possible, and reported that there was a bend about a foot in. While he was doing this, Chamberlin made a minute investigation of the door, but found that neither hinges nor lock were accessible. There were no other openings into the chamber save the electric conduit which presumably entered above the electric fixture in the ceiling. Finally Baker spoke. "Nothing we can do until they come for us. We'd better plan towards that, unless they're going to gas us through the ventilator." This unpleasant thought had not occurred to the rest of us before. Martin returned to the opening and sniffed, and then with happy inspiration, he rolled up his jacket and stuffed it in. Baker nodded approval. So the time passed. We listened at the door for footsteps but none came. Presently we became aware of a now familiar sensation. The floor commenced to shake gently and regularly. We coimted the steps. There were twelve, and then they stopped. Chamberlin calculated mentally. "Say, about # feet per step. That would be three thousand feet -- six tenths of a mile. Wonder where -- " Martin, still near the ventilator, shushed him, and ptilled the coat out. Through the small hole we heard a deep sound, a sort of low pitched irregular rumble. Baker suddenly jumped up and listened at the opening. After a bit the sound stopped. Baker became excited. "It was a voice," he explained. "I think it was his voice. It was speaking Japanese. I couldn't catch many words, but I think he was talking about us." Now the rumble came again, and louder. A few words, a pause, and then more words, as though he was in conversation with someone whom we could not hear. Baker listened intently, but he could catch only fragments, owing to his small knowledge of Japanese and the extremely low pitched articulation of the giant. Presently the voice rose to a volume which literally made the mountain tremble, and then it stopped. Baker shook his head. "Couldn't make it out. I think he was inquiring where we were, but it was too idiomatic. I think he became excited or angry at the last." "Fee, fi, fo, fum," said Chamberlin. "Now wouldn't that be an interesting end?" Martin laughed. "We wouldn't even be enough to taste." As no one else seemed anxious to pursue this subject further, we subsided into a sort of lethargy. Even plans for what we should do when the guards came were forgotten. And then, suddenly, the door was opened. We all sprang to our feet. A priest -- in fact, the same one who had brought us here originally -- came in. A squad of guards stood outside. "Good afternoon, how are you? Chief Priest ask me to tell you, Buddha wish to see you. Please you come with me." He politely indicated the door. With a shrug Baker complied, and the rest of us followed. Down the hall we marched again, through all of the turns of the morning and so at last into the corridor which ended in a window. This time we passed the aluminum door and continued right to the end. The window, we now saw, was really a French door which opened to a small balcony. Our guide opened the door and pushed us out. The bakony, we found, was about four hundred feet above the valley floor, but we did not spend much time enjoying the view. Scarcely fifty feet in front of us stood the Living Buddha! For a full minute we stared at each other, and then I began to realize that he was embarrassed! A wrinkle appeared between his eyes and he swallowed a couple of times. Then he spoke. "Good ternoon. Professor Baker and party. I am happy to meet you." The voice, and particularly the langue, so startled us that for a moment nobody could think of a reply. The voice was a deep pulsing rumble, like the tone of the biggest pipes of an organ, and filled with a variety of glottal wheezings and windy overtones. I think it was through these additional sounds rather than the actual tones that we could understand him at all, for the fundamentals were surely below the ordinary limits of human audibility. What we heard and could translate into articulate words was hardly more than a cavernous whisper. The important thing was that we could understand him, and, more than that, that he was friendly. Baker made reply at last. "Good afternoon. We also are happy, and most honored. How should we address you?" "My name is Kazu Takahashi, but I am told that I am also Buddha. This I would like to discuss with you, if you have time." "We have time for nothing else," said Baker. Buddha's eyebrows raised slightly. "So I was right. They are going to kill you." Baker glanced at us meaningfully. This giant was no fool. Suddenly there came over me a little thrill of hope. Maybe -- but he was speaking again. "I have not before had opportunity to talk to men from west. Only from China, Japan, Soviet State. You will tell me of rest of world?" "With pleasure," said Baker. I became conscious that the door behind us was opening. I glanced back, and saw Phobat Rau, surrounded by guards and priests.He gestured to us to come in. Baker turned, while Buddha bent his head closer to see also. Rau came to the door. "Come back," he called urgently. "You are in grave danger. You must come in." Q uite definitely I had no desire to go in. Neither did Baker, for he shook his head and moved away from the door. Rau's face was suddenly enraged. He made a quick motion to the guards, and then held them back. With an evident effort he calmed himself and called again, softly. "Please come in. I was hasty this morning. I am sorry. I think now I see a way for you to return safely, if you will come in." For reply. Baker turned to the giant. He climbed upon the rail of the balcony. "Take us away from here, if you wish to hear what we have to say. Take us, or they will kill us!" In answer, Buddha extended one hand, palm up, so that it was level with the balcony. For an instant I hesitated at the sight of that irregular rough surface, big as a city block, and then I heard steps behind us and a click. With one accord we leaped over the parapet just as a scattered volley of pistol shots rang out. We tumbled head over heels down a rough leathery slope into a hollow, and then the platform lifted like a roller coaster. In a second the balcony, the whole hillside vanished and we went rocketing up into the blue sky. A gale of wind blew past, almost carrying us with it, and then a portion of the surface rose and became thirty foot tree trunks which curled incredibly over and around us, forming a small cavern which shut out the wind and held us securely against falling. Buddha had closed his fist. For a breathless fifteen seconds we were carried in darkness, and then the great hand unfolded. It was lying flat on an immense smooth area of concrete, which we presently identified as the higher of the two tables. We got to our feet and staggered to the edge of the palm. Here we met another probli in, in the form of a rounded ten foot drop-off to the concrete table. As we stood looking down in dismay, the other va.st hand came up from below, carrying a heavy sheet of metal. This was carefully placed with one edge on the hand and the other on the table, forming a ramp. Holding onto each other for mutual support, we made our way to the table and there literally collapsed. Chamberlin became violently sick, and none of the rest of us felt much better. The giant carefully withdrew both hands and watched us from a distance of a hundred yards, with only the head and upper part of his body visible. From our position on the concrete platform I now looked closely at Kazu for the first time. My first impression was not so much one of size, as of an incredible richness of detail. It was hke examining a normal human through a powerful microscope, except here the whole was visible at once. Even at a distance of two hundred feet, the hair, the eyelashes, the pores of the skin showed up with a texture and form which I had never noted before, even in my studies as a biologist. The general effect was most confusing, for I would lose and regain the sense of scale, first thinking of him as an ordinary man, and then realizing the proportion. The nearest comparison that I can think of is the sensation when standing very close to a large motion picture screen, but here the image is blurry whereas I saw with a clarity and sharpness that was simply unbelievable. Buddha seemed to realize our condition, for he smiled sympathetically, and waited until poor Walt had recovered somewhat from his nausea. Baker, as spokesman, renewed the conversation. Walking a few steps toward the front of the enormous desk, he spoke in a loud clear voice. "You have saved our lives. We thank you." The great head nodded benignly, and after a thoughtful pause, that strange voice began. "My teachers have brought others before me to lecture, but always I know that they speak only as they are told to speak. You are different. I am glad that I saw you last night, or I would never know that you had come." He paused, evidently gathering his thoughts for the next foray into an unfamiliar language. Then he leaned closer. "Phobat Rau has spoken to you of my birth and life here?" Baker nodded, and then, realizing that Kazu could not see such a microscopic movement, he replied orally. "He has told us your story in detail. It is a marvel which we can yet scarcely believe. But the greatest marvel of all is that you speak our language, and comprehend so quickly." Kazu thought of this for a moment. "Yes, my teachers have done well, I think. I have studied the writings of many great men, but there is yet much that I do not understand. I think it is important that I understand, because I am so strong. I do not wish to use this strength for evil, and I am not sure that those whom my teachers serve are good. I have studied the words of the great Buddha, but now my teachers say that I am to appear as if I were Buddha. But that is an untruth, and untruth is evil. So now I hope that you will tell me the whole truth." Kazu stepped back a quarter of a mile, and then reappeared, dragging his four hundred foot chair. Sitting on this, he crouched forward until his face was hardly a hundred feet before us, and his warm humid breath swept over us like wind from some exotic jungle. Baker took a moment to marshal his thoughts, and then came forward, threw out his chest and began speaking as though addressing an outdoor political meeting. How long Baker spoke I do not know. He began by outlining history, contrasting the ideals of Buddha and other great religious leaders with the dark record of human oppression and cruelty. Kazu's vast face proved most expressive of his feelings as he listened intently. When Baker came to the subject of communism, he leaned over so far backward in his effort to be fair that I feared that he was overdoing it, and would convince the giant in the wrong direction. way through his lecture, he remarked that some point in geography could be better explained by a drawing, but that obviously he could not make one large enough for Kazu to see. At this the giant laughed and pointed to his big lean to. "Come," he said, "you shall draw on a piece of glass and the light will make it great that I may see." We were thereupon transferred the mile distance to the building by a reversal of our previous route; up the ramp to Kazu's ample palm, a series of breathtaking swoops through space, and we were in the vast interior of the leanto. The furnishings of this study room consisted of a chair, a sloping writing desk and a screen fully two hundred feet square on the wall opposite the chair. Beside the chair was a sort of bracket on the wall which supported the projection room. Kazu placed his hand level with an elevated balcony leading to this and we scrambled off. With Baker in the lead, we opened the door and entered the projection room. It was larger than we had estimated from outside, when we had the immense furniture for comparison. The dimensions were perhaps forty feet on the side, and most of the interior was taken up by shelves on which were stored thousands of films of book pages, maps, photographs and diagrams of all kinds. In the side facing the screen were a number of ports and a battery of movie and still projectors. One of the latter was, we saw, adapted for writing or drawing on the glass slide while it was being projected. We studied this for a moment, located the special marking pencil, and then I called out of the door that we were ready. "Look also," replied Kazu, "you will find device which magnify voice. My teachers use this always." A further search disclosed a microphone and the sw'itch for a public address amplifier. Baker M tiled down to his now illustrated lei lure. After he had talked himself hoarse, Baker asked each of the rest of us to speak briefly on our own specialties. I was the last, and I was practically through when I became aware that we were not alone in the room. I gave Martin a nudge, and turned from the microphone to face eight of the uniformed guards, led by our friendly yellow-robed priest. Only now he wasn't friendly, and he carried a heavy automatic which was carefully aimed right at us. "Very clever, gentlemen," he said. "You took good advantage of your chance with our simple giant, did you not? Tried your best to ruin the whole work of Pan-Asia just to save your miserable skins. Well, you shall not -- " He was interrupted by the thunder of Kazu's voice. "Please continue, Mr. Cady. I find it most interesting. Why do you stop?" I took a step toward the microphone, but a menacing gesture with the gun stopped me. I looked from yellow-robe to Baker. After a moment's hesitation, the latter spoke. "I'm afraid, my friend, that you have misjudged the situation. I admit that we jumped into Buddha's hand to escape from Phobat Rau, but if you are familiar with the expression, our leap was from the frying pan into the fire. Your giant is holding us prisoner, and even now forces us to tell him things on pain of death." The priest looked astonished, and the gun barrel dropped slightly. "No one," continued Baker in a sincere tone, "could have been more welcome than you. But" -- his voice dropped and he took a step toward the other -- "we must be careful. If he should even suspect that you are here to rescue us, he would crush this room like an egg!" The priest, now thoroughly alarmed, glanced about nervously, his automatic pointing at the floor. The guards, who knew no English, looked at each other in surprise. Baker took quick advantage of the confusion. "We must not allow him to become suspicious. I will continue talking over the microphone while your guards take my friends to safety." With this he stepped to the microphone and projector. The priest seemed for an instant about to stop him, and then he turned to the guards and gave a series of rapid orders. They advanced and surrounded Martin, Walt and me, and indicated by gesture that we were to go with them to the walkway which led to the wall of the great room. In panic I looked at Baker, but he was bent over the glass plate of the projector, drawing something and speaking in his precise clipped voice. "I shall now show you a map of the United States and indicate the principal cities. First, on the Atlantic coast we have New York... We were out of the room and on the gallery. For a moment I thought that Kazu might see us, and then I realized that the whole place was dark and that he was concentrating on Baker's silly map. Briefly I wondered what Baker was up to anyway, but this sudden terrible turn of events made any kind of calm reasoning very difficult. Outside the projection room. Baker's voice came booming over the loudspeakers "Chicago is located at the southern end of Lake Michigan, just west of Detroit, while St. Louis -- " came on, and the whole structure of the bridge shook as from an earthquake. The guards ahead abruptly turned and scrambled back, knocking us over in their haste. I grabbed the handrail for support, and then became aware of a vast blurry shape looming above and of a hand as large as a building that reached down toward the guards, now halfway back to the projection room. In a sort of hypnotic horror I watched the thumb and forefinger snap them and a thirty foot section of railing off into space. Then, very gently the hand plucked the roof from the projection room, exposing Baker and thef priest. Yellow-robe dropped his gun and ran towards a corner, but Baker neatly tripped him and then stepped back for Kazu to finish the job. A moment later Baker came out onto the bridge. Martin tried to frame a question. "What -- how did he -- ?" Baker grinned and pointed dlently at the screen. We looked and understood. Where a map of the United States should have been was a scrawled message in English: "Priests here taking us captive." We returned to our lecturing, but after what had happened neither we nor Ka#u felt much like concentrating on geographical or other general facts. We all knew that Rau had not given up. For the moment we were protected by Kazu's immense power, but there were some doubts in our minds as to how long this might last. After all, Rau was his lifelong mentor and protector. For the moment the young giant seemed to have taken a liking to us, but perhaps it was only a passing whim. Presently Rau would assert his authority and Kazu, his curiosity satisfied, would hand us over -- in exchange, perhaps, for supper. After about fifteen minutes more of lecturing, Kazu interrupted. "Soon will be sunset. Suggest we return to privacy of high table to discuss next move." The transfer took less than a minute. The afternoon, we saw, was indeed far gone. None of us had realized how long we had been in the projection room. Once we were safely back on the table, Kazu addressed us, using his softest voice, which was a hurricane-like whisper. "Phobat Rau plans for me to go soon to head armies of Asia in fight against west. My study of history has raised doubts of rightness of such war, and what you say strengthen these. Now I must see for myself, without guidance or interference from Rau. But I need assistance, to direct me how I shall go. I believe you will be fair. Will you help me?" For a moment the incongruity of that last question prevented om: grasping the full implication of Kazu's statement. Then Baker, evidently realizing that this was no time for philosophic quibbling, signified our assent. Kazu proceeded at once to practical plans. "Tonight I sleep in usual place, where you disturbed me with small rock slide. But you must stay awake by turns to guard against capture. In morning you direct my steps away from Yat to mainland of Asia, where -- " He stopped. Seeing the direction he was looking, we hastened to the edge of the table. Far below, on the ground, was a railroad train surrounded by a small crowd of priests. For a moment we were puzzled, and then we saw that the train was made up entirely of gondola cars such as are used to carry coal and other bulk cargo. But these cars, a dozen in number, contained a white substance which steamed. We did not require more than one guess. The train brought Kazu's supper. The giant made a slight bow of thanks to the delegation at his feet, and proceeded carefully to empty the cars into his dish. Then, instead of squatting at his low eating table, he brought the dish and other utensils up to our level and dumped a ton or so of steaming rice at our feet. Evidently he wished us to share his supper. We had no tools other than our hands, but since we had not eaten in almost twentyfour hours, we did not stop for the conventions. Scooping up double handfulls of the unseasoned stuff, we fell to even before Kazu had gotten his ponderous spoon into position. Suddenly, Baker yelled at us. "Hold it!" He turned to Kazu who had a spoonful poised halfway to his mouth. "Kazu, don't eat. This rice is doped!" I took a mouthful of the rice. There was not much flavor -- only a little salt which I guessed came from seawater. I explored the stuff with my tongue, and presently noticed a familiar taste. It took me a moment to place it. Yes, that was it. Barbiturate. The stuff in sleeping pills. Kazu bent his great face over us. Baker briefly explained. Kazu appeared at first puzzled. He dropped the spoon into the dish and pushed it away from him. His brow wrinkled, and he glanced down at the ground. Walking to the edge, we saw that the group of priests were standing quietly around the engine, as though waiting for something. What they were waiting for evidently struck Kazu and us at the same time. Kazu leaned toward them and spoke in Japanese. His voice was angry. Baker tried to translate. "He says, 'how dare you poison Buddha' -- Look, they're running off -- " The next second things happened too rapidly for translation or even immediate interpretation. Kazu spoke again, his voice rising to an earth shaking roar at the end. The little men below were scattering in all directions, and the train started to back off down its track. Suddenly Kazu turned and picked up his hundred foot steel dish. He swept it across the table and then down in a long curving arc. There was an earth shaking thud and where the running figures and the train had been was now only the upturned bottom of the immense dish. Priests and cars alike were entombed in a thousand tons of hot rice! Kazu now turned to us. "Gome," he said, "Yat is not safe, even for Buddha. Now we must leave here at once." He extended his hand towards us, and then, with another thought, turned and strode to the leanto. In a moment he returned carrying the projection room, with a tail of structural steel and electric cables hanging below. This he placed on the table and indicated that we were to enter. As soon as we were inside, Kazu clapped on the roof and picked up the stout steel box. We clung to the frame supporting the projectors, while a mass of slides, film cans and other debris battered us with every swooping motion. We could not see what was going on outside, but the giant seemed to be picking up a number of things from the ground and from inside the leanto. Then he commenced a regular stride across the crater floor. Now at last we got to a window, just in time to glimpse the nearby cliff. On the rim, some hundreds of feet above I saw a group of uniformed men clustered about some device. Then we were closer and I saw that it was an antiaircraft gun, which they were trying to direct at us. I think Kazu must have seen it at the same moment, for abruptly he scrambled up the steep hillside and pulverized gun, crew and the whole crater rim with one tremendous blow of his fist. I got a brief aerial view of the whole island as Kazu balanced momentarily on the rim, and then we were all thrown to the floor as he stumbled and slid down the hillside to the level country outside of the crater. V been engaged in an essentially personal enterprise, even though its object was to secure information vital to the United Nations. From this time on, however, the personal element was to become almost completely subordinate to the vast problems of humanity itself, for, as we were to soon find, we had tied ourselves to a symbol that was determined to live up to all that was claimed or expected of him, and further, who depended upon our advice. The situation for us was made much worse because at first we doubted both his sincerity and good sense -- in fact, it was not until after the Wagnerian climax of the whole thing that we at last realized, along with the rest of the world, exactly what Kazu Takahashi believed in. Kazu crossed the flat eastern half of Yat in less than a minute, evidently wishing to get out of range of Rau's artillery as quickly as possible. His feet tore through the groves as a normal man's might flirough a field of clover; indeed, he experienced more trouble from the softness of the ground than from any vegetation. As we were soon to learn, one of the disadvantages of Kazu's size lay in the mechanical properties of the world as experienced by him. Kazu stood almost # feet high, or roughly # times the linear dimensions of a normal man. From the simple laws of geometry, this increased his weight by of his body, including the soles of his feet which had to support this gigantic load, had increased by but lOff, or ten thousand times. The ground pressure under his feet was thus # times greater, for each square inch, than for a normal man. The result was that Kazu sank into the ground at each step until he reached bedrock, or soil strong enough to carry the load. At the beach he hesitated briefly, as though getting his bearings, and then waded into the ocean. The surf which had used us so violently was to him only a half inch ripple. He strode through the shallows and past the reef in a matter of seconds, and then plunged into deeper water. From our dizzy perch, now carried at hip height, we watched the great feet drive down into the sea, leaving green walls of solid water about them. Although we did not realize it at the time, we later learned that Kazu's wading forays were attended by tidal waves which inundated islands up to a hundred miles away. This trip across a twenty mile strait swamped a dozen native fishing craft, flooded out four villages and killed some hundreds of people. We fared better than some of these innocent bystanders, for Kazu carefully held our steel box above the sea, and presently lurched through shallow water to the dry land. The new island was larger than Yat, and entirely given over to rice growing for Kazu's food supply. He threaded his way easily among the paddies, up through some low hills, and then down a narrow gorge into the sea again. Ahead lay a much more extensive body of water. The sun was now hardly fifteen degrees above the horizon, and its glare plus a bank of clouds made it difficult to see the distant land. Kazu raised our room to the level of his face. "Is that Island of Celebes?" Baker started to pick up the microphone, and then abruptly realizing that it was dead, he shouted back from the projection port. "I think it is. Let me look for a chart." Kazu waited patiently while we searched, placing the room on a hilltop to give us a steadier platform. We all began a mad scramble in the mass of debris. Kazu removed the roof to give more light, but it soon became clear that there wasn't much hope. All that we could find were thousands of slides of the Chinese classics. At last we gave up. When we told Kazu this, he looked across the water and wrinkled his brow. We could sense the reason for his anxiety, for the distant shore could hardly be less than seventy miles away. Mentally I reduced this to terms I could understand. Seven tenths of a mile, of which an unknown percentage might be swimming. Kazu's voice rumbled down to us, "I would prefer to wade. I cannot swim well." He peered down into our roofless box anxiously. "If we only had one chart," began Baker, when Walt, who had been rummaging near the projector window, called to us. "Take a look over there, just around the point." We saw the prow of a ship. There was a moment of terror lest it be an Indonesian coast patrol, and then we saw that it was just a small island steamer of a thousand tons or so, chugging along less than two miles offshore. at the same instant. Baker, as spokesman, called to Kazu. The giant, for the first time, grinned at us. Then he picked up our box and waded into the ocean. I don't think the people in the little ship even saw us until we were practically upon them, because of the mist and sunset glare. What they thought I can only imagine, for the water was little more than knee deep and Kazu towered fully four hundred feet above it. Then a hand as big as the foredeck reached down and gently stopped them by the simple expedient of forming a V between thumb and fingers into which the prow pushed. I heard the sound of bells and saw tiny figures scurrying about on the deck. On the opposite side a number of white specks appeared in the water as crewmen dove overboard. Our box was now lowered until its door was next to the bridge. We leaped aboard, under cover of a great hand which obligingly plucked away the near wall of the pilot house. We entered the house just as the captain beat a precipitate retreat out the other side, and after a moment in the chartroom we found what we wanted. While Martin stood watch at the far door, we took advantage of the electric lights to examine the chart of the east coast of Celebes. That island, we found, was only sixty miles away and the deepest sounding was less than six hundred feet. Kazu could wade the whole distance. T he nautical charts did not show much detail for the interior of Celebes, but from our elevation we could see enough of the terrain to guide Kazu quite well. The course which Baker plotted took us across the northern part of the big island, and far enough inland to avoid easy detection from the sea. As the day progressed, the sky gradually filled with clouds, promising more rain, so that I doubt if many people saw us. Those who did, I suspect, were more interested in taking cover than in interfering with Kazu's progress. The journey across Celebes took only a couple of hours, and so, by noon, we stood on the shore of the strait of Macassar, looking across seventy-five miles of blue water to the mountains of Borneo. It was not until now that Baker explained what he had in mind in choosing this particular route. "We're going to Singapore," he s:iid. "Get under the protection of ilie Royal Navy and Air Force before the commies spot us and i,rt dropping bombs and rockets. If Buddha wants to see the world, he'd better start by getting a good bodyguard." Kazu seemed agreeable when appraised of this plan, and so we began to plot a more detailed route over the # miles between us and the British crown colony. We stood at the narrowest part of the strait, but unfortunately most of it was too deep for Kazu to wade. Reference to the charts showed that by going # miles south, we would reduce the swim to about # miles, or the equivalent of some # yards for a normal man. To this was added a wade of # miles through shallows and over the many small Balabalagan Islands. Suddenly Kazu's hand swept down and came up with a #-foot whale, which he devoured in great gory bites. After this midocean lunch, Kazu resumed his wading. In the middle of the strait the depth exceeded five thousand feet, and he had to swim for a time, after fastening our box to his head by means of the trailing cables. At length the sea became shallow once more, Kazu's feet crunched through coral, and the coast of Borneo appeared dimly ahead. We were all taking time for the luxury of a sigh of relief when Chamberlin screamed a warning. "Planes! Coming in low at three o'clock!" Fortunately Kazu heard this also, although the language confused him. Precious seconds were wasted while he held the box up to his face for more explicit directions. The planes, a flight of six, were streaking towards us just above the wavetops, We could see that they carried torpedoes, and it was not difficult to guess their intentions. "Go sideways!" Baker yelled, but Kazu did not move. He simply stood facing the oncoming aircraft, our box held in his left hand at head level, and his right arm hanging at his side, half submerged. Either Kazu was too frightened to move, or he did not understand the danger. The planes were hardly a half mile away now, evidently holding their fire until the last moment to insure a hit. What even one torpedo could do I didn't dare to contemplate, and here were twelve possible strikes. After all, Kazu was made of flesh, and after having seen of a ship, I had little doubt as to what would happen to him. Now the last seconds were at hand. The planes were closing at five hundred yards, the torpedoes would drop in a second... But suddenly Kazu moved. His whole body swung abruptly to the left and at the same time the right hand came up through the water. We, of course, were pitched headlong, but we did briefly glimpse a tremendous fan of solid green water rising up to meet the planes. They tried to dodge but it was too late. Into the waterspout they flew, all six with their torpedoes still attached, and down into the ocean they fell, broken and sinking. It was all over in a moment. We were so amazed it Was moments before we could move. Kazu turned and resumed his stroll toward Borneo without a single backward glance at the havoc wrought by his splash. A S WE entered the foothills . I became conscious for the first time of a curious change. It was a psychological change in me, a change in my sense of scale. We had been carried so long at Kazu's shoulder level, and had grown so accustomed to looking out along his arms from almost the same viewpoint as his, that we were now estimating the size of the mountains as though we were as large as Kazu! It is difficult to express just how I felt, and now that it is all over, the memory has become so tenuous and subtle that I fear I will never be able to explain it so that anyone but my three companions could understand. But this was the first moment that I noticed the effect. The mountains were suddenly no longer # foot peaks viewed from a plane # feet above ground level, but were forty foot mounds with a six inch cover of mossy brush, and I was walking up their sides as a normal human being! The change was, as nearly as I can express it, from the viewpoint of a normal human being under extraordinary circumstances to that of an ordinary man visiting a miniature world. The whale to me was now a fat jellyfish seven inches long, the Chinese warplanes were toys with an eight inch wingspread, the little steamer of yesterday was a flimsy toy built of cardboard and tinfoil. We had, in effect, identified ourselves completely with Kazu. And so we climbed dripping from the Straits of Macassar, and entered the mists and jungles of Borneo. Our course toward Singapore carried us across the full width of southern Borneo, a distance, from a point north of Kotabaroe to Cape Datu, of almost six hundred miles. After about an hour, the blue outlines of the Sch wanner Mountains appeared ahead and presently we passed quite close to Mt. Raya, which at # feet was the greatest mountain Kazu had ever seen. Then, dropping into another valley, we followed the course of the Kapuas River for a time, and finally turned west again through an area of plantations. Here Kazu made an effort to secure food by plucking and eating fruit and treetops together. The result was unsatisfactory, but presently we came upon a granary containing thousands of sacks of rice. The workmen, warned by our earthquake approach, fled long before we reached it Kazu carefully removed the corrugated iron roof and ate the whole contents of the warehouse, which amounted to about a handful. The sacks appeared about a quarter of an inch in length, and seemed to be filled with a fine white powder. Following this meal, Kazu drained a small lake, getting incidentally a goodly catch of carp, although he could not even taste them. Then, since it was now late in the afternoon, he turned northwest to the hills to spend the night. I'he last part of the journey was almost entirely through shallow water -- three hundred miles of the warm South China Sea. Baker I'lanncd to make a before dawn url, so that we might be close to I he M.il.iy Peninsula before dayI ' ' I Miilcl espnse us to further ati.e I. K.izu suggested pushing on at once, but Baker did not think it wise to approach the formidable defenses of Singapore by night. And so for a second time we sought out an isolated valley where Kazu could snuggle between two soft hills, and we could get what sleep was possible in the wreckage of the projection room. The China Sea passage was made without incident. We started at three A.M. in a downpour of rain, and by six, at dawn, the low outline of the Malay Peninsula came into sight. We made our landfall some forty miles north of Singapore, and at once cut across country toward Johore Bahru and the great British crown colony. The rice paddies, roads and other signs of civilization were a welcome sight, and I was already relaxing, mentally, in a hot tub at the officers club when the awakening came. It came in the form of a squadron of fighter planes carrying British markings which roared out of the south without warning and passed Kazu's head with all their guns firing. Fortunately neither his eyes nor our thin shelled box was hat, but Kazu felt the tiny projectiles which penetrated even his twelve inch hide. As the planes wheeled for another pass he called out in English that he was a friend, but of course the pilots could not hear above the roar of their jets. On the second try two of the planes released rockets, which fortunately missed, but this put a different light on the whole thing. A direct hit with a ten inch rocket would be as dangerous as a torpedo. Baker tried to yell some advice, but there was no chance before the planes came in again. This time Kazu waved, and finally threw a handful of earth and trees at them. The whole squadron zoomed upwards like a covey of startled birds. By the time we had reached a temporary haven, Kazu was thoroughly winded, and we were battered nearly insensible. Baker, in fact, was out cold. Kazu slowed down, and then finding no directions or advice forthcoming, he resumed a steady dogtrot to the north. Martin and I tried to draw Baker to a safer position beside the projector, but in the process one of the steel shelves collapsed, adding Martin to the casualty list. Walt and I then attempted to drag the two of them to safety, but in the midst of these efforts a particularly hard lurch sent me headfirst into the projector, and my interest in proceedings thereupon became nil. Walt, battered and seasick, gave up and collapsed with the rest of us. Further efforts at communication by Kazu proved fruitless. Buddha was on his own. VI headache to find the steel room motionless, and warm sunshine streaming into my face. Looking around, I saw that my three companions were all up and apparently in good shape. Baker was the first to notice that I was awake, and he came over immediately. "Feel better?" he inquired cheerfully. He helped me up and I staggered to the window. The room was perched, as usual, on a hilltop, but the vegetation around was not tropical jungle. I turned to the others, noting as I did that the room was cleaned up. "Where -- " I started, with a gesture outside. Baker stopped me and led me to an improvised canvas hammock. "You really got a nasty one," he said. "You've been out two days." "Two days!" I tried to rise, but the effort so increased the headache that I gave up and collapsed into the hammock. "Just lie quiet and I'll bring you up to date." Baker drew up an empty film box for a seat. "I was knocked about a bit myself, you know, and by the time I came around, our friend had trotted the whole length of the Malay Peninsula and was halfway across Burma." "But the people at Singapore," I began, "Don't those fools know yet -- " "Things have changed," said Baker. "The biggest change has been in Buddha's mind. He took our advice and almost got killed for his pains. Now he's on his own." I tried to look through the open door. Baker shook his head. "He's not here. No -- " this in answer to my startled look, "just off for a stroll, towards China this time, I think. Yesterday he visited Lhasa. Said it's quite a place. Talked to the Lamas in Tibetan, and they understood him. He calls it playing Buddha." Baker got up and searched among the maps, finally finding one of southeast Asia. He spread it out before me, and placed a finger rather vaguely on the great Yunnan Plateau between Burma and China. "We're here, somewhere. Buddha doesn't know exactly, himself. He made it to Lhasa by following the Himalayas, and watching for the Potala. I hope he'll find his .way back this time -- be a bit awktrd for us if he doesn't." He stepped outside and brought in some cold cooked rice and meat. "Kazu brought us a handful of cows yesterday. They were practically mashed into hamburger. I guess you'd call this pounded steak." I ate some of the meat and settled back to rest again. Presently I dozed off. When I awakened it was dark and Kazu was back. Martin had started a big campfire outside, evidently with Kazu's aid, for it was stoked with several logs fully eight feet in diameter and was sending flames fifty feet into the sky. Kazu himself was squatting directly over it, staring down at us. When I came to the door, he spoke. "Ah, little brother Bill. I am so sorry that you were hurt. I am afraid I forgot to be gentle, and that is not forgiveable in Buddha." I made an appropriate reply, and then waited. Evidently he had as yet told nothing of his day's expedition. Finally he plucked a roasted bullock from the fire and popped it into his mouth like a nut. "Today," he said, "I visit Chungking, Nanking, Peking. I think know more than that see me. Also I talk to them. They understand, for miles. They expected me. As you say, brother Llewelyn, Rau has excellent propaganda machine. Everywhere Aey hail me as Buddha, come to save them from war and disease and western imperialism. I speak to them as Buddha; today, I am Buddha." Baker glanced at us meaningfully and murmured, "I was afraid of this." But Kazu continued. "Today all of China believes I am Buddha. Only you and I know this is not so, but we can fight best if they believe." "Have you eaten?" inquired Martin. Kazu nodded. "At every temple they collect rice for Buddha. Many small meals make full belly. But," his face wrinkled with concern, "many thousands could live on what I eat today. China is so poor. So ma.ny people, so little food. I must find ways to help them." He paused, and then resumed in a firmer tone. "But not in communist way. Rau was right about western imperialists, but he named wrong country. Russian imperialists have enslaved China. First we must drive communists from China. Then I can help." "Amen," said Baker softly. Then, to Kazu... "We've been trying to do just that for years. But how can you ple?" "Don't fight -- lead them." It sounded so simple, the way he said it. Well, maybe he could. But now Baker had more practical questions. "What does the rest of the world think about all this? Have you talked to any Europeans, or heard a radio?" Kazu shook his head. "But I caught communist General. He tell me Russia sending army to capture me. He say only hope is for me to surrender, or Russian drop atom bomb on me. Then I eat him." We must have showed our startled reaction, for Kazu laughed. "Not much nourishment in communist. I eat him for propaganda -- many people see me do it. Effect very good." He paused. "Not tasty, but symbolic meal. China is like Buddha, giant who can eat up enemies." "What are you going to do next?" asked Baker. "That is question. I need more information. Where is leadership in China I can trust? What will Russians do? How long for British and Americans to wake up?" "You're not the only one asking these questions," said Baker. "But maybe you can get some answers." B efore Kazu could continue, Chamberlin held up his hand for silence. We listened, and presently heard above the crackle of the great bonfire, the throb of an airplane engine. Kazu heard it too, for he suddenly arose and stepped back out of the light. We four also hastened into the shadows and peered into the dark sky. The approaching aircraft displayed no lights, but presently we saw it in the firelight -- a multi-jet bomber bearing American markings. We rushed back into die illuminated area and danced up and down, waving our arms. The huge plane swung in a wide circle and came in less than five hundred feet above the hilltop. I could make out faces peering down at us from the glassed greenhouse in front. As it roared pzist, one wing tipped slightly in the updraft from the fire, and then suddenly the plane stopjied dead in its tracks. The jets roared a deeper note as they bit into still air, and then very slowly and gently the great ship moved back and down until it rested on its belly beside our steel box. Not until it was quite safe on the ground did Kazu's hands release their hold on the wings, where he had caught it in midair. The eleven crew men from the B# came out with their hands in the air, but their expressions were more incredulous than frightened. Baker added to the unreality of the situation by his greeting, done in the best "Dr. Livingstone-I-presume" manner. "Welcome to Camp Yunnan. Sorry we had to be so abrupt. I'm Baker, these are Chamberlin, Martin, Cady." "I'm Faulkner," replied the leader of the Americans automatically, and then he abruptly sat down and was violently sick. We waited patiently until he could speak again. "My God, I didn't believe it when we heard." He was talking to no-one in particular. "One minute we're flying at # miles per hour, the next we're picked out of the air like a -- like a -- " He gave up. Kazu came into the firelight and squatted down, quite slowly. Baker introduced him. "Colonel, I'd like you to meet Kazu Takahashi." The American arose and extended his hand, and then dropped it abruptly to his side. Kazu emitted a thunderous chuckle. "Handshake is, I fear, formality I must always pass up, even at risk of impoliteness." I think that the language, and particularly the phrasing, jolted the airmen even more than the actual capture. Colonel Faulkner kept shaking his head and murmuring "My God!" for several moments, and then pulled himself together. "So the story's really true after all," he finally said. "We got it on the radio day before yesterday at Manila. It was so garbled at first that nobody could make any sense. Ships reported thousand foot men wading in the ocean. New Macassar radio reported that Buddha was reincarnated, and then denied the story. Announcements of a pitched battle at Singapore, and frantic reports from every town on the peninsula. Then a statement by some Lama on Macassar that the British had kidnaped Buddha, had him hypnotized or doped, and were using him to exterminate China." He paused and looked up at Kazu, who had bent down until his face was only a hundred feet above us. "Part of it is true," said Baker. "Thric was a giant wading in the occ.m. As to the rest, I fear we have caught the red radio without a M lipt. I'll tell you the story presently, but just now there are more urgent things to do. Is your radio working?" Faulkner nodded and led us towards the plane. Baker continued. "Briefly, Kazu is a mutation produced by the Hiroshima bomb. He's been groomed for twenty years to take over as the world's largest puppet, but it turns out he has a mind of his own. We just happened along, and are going on for the ride. Want to join the party?" The Colonel grinned for the first time as we all squeezed into the radio compartment of the plane. "I like travel," he said. "It's so broadening." The radio was not only operative, but proved most informative as well. Every transmitter on earth, it seemed, was talking about the giant. In the course of an hour we listened to a dozen major stations and got as many versions of the story. The communist propaganda factory had obviously been caught flat footed, for their broadcasts were a hopeless mixture of releases evidently prepared for the planned introduction of Buddha to the world, and hastily assembled diatribes against the capitalist imperialists who had so foully captured him. Some of the Russians apparently were not in on the secret of Buddha's dimensions, for they described in detail how a raiding party of eighty American commando-gangsters had landed by parachute on Yat, seized Buddha, and taken him away in a seaplane. Before we went to sleep that night, Kazu extinguished the fire so that no one else would be attracted as the Colonel had been. tion concerned transportation. Colonel Faulkner naturally did not want to leave his plane, particularly since it was undamaged, but a takeoff from our narrow mountain ledge was obviously impossible, so he regretfully ordered his crew to unload their personal effects for transfer to our box. At this point Kazu stepped in. "If you will enter your airplane and start jets," he said, "Buddha will serve as launching mechanism." Before the takeoff, the Colonel transferred his spare radio gear to our box, along with an auxiliary generator, and we agreed on a schedule to keep in touch. Then Kazu gently picked up the bomber, raised it high above his head and sent it gliding off to the north. The engines coughed a couple of times and then caught with a roar. Colonel Faulkner wagged his wings and vanished into the haze. Our plan was to follow the plane east to the Wu River, and then north to its meeting with the Yangtze, which occurs some seventy five miles below Chungking. While the B# cruised around us in a great circle, we loaded our belongings into the box, and Kazu picked us up and signalled the plane that we were ready. Colonel Faulkner's intention had been to circle us rather than leave us behind with his superior speed, but in a moment it became clear that this would not be necessary. Kazu set off down the canyon at a pace better than three hundred miles per hour, and the Colonel had to gun his motors to keep up. We passed only a few small towns on the Wu. Kazu had been here before, and had evidently stopped to talk and make friends, for we observed none of the fright which had formerly greeted his advent. Instead, crowds ran out to meet us, waving the forbidden Nationalist flag and shooting off firecrackers. Kazu spoke briefly in Cantonese to each group, and then hurried on. Baker explained that he was giving them formal blessings, in the name of Buddha. An hour's time brought us to Fowchow, on the mighty Yangtze Kiang. Here Kazu turned left, wading in the stream, and negotiated the seventy odd miles to Chungking in fifteen minutes. The distance from Chungking to Hankow is somewhat more than five hundred miles. For much of this distance the Yangtze is bounded by mountains and rocky gorges, but in the final # miles, the hills drop away and the river winds slowly through China's lake country. Kazu made good time in the gorge, but his feet sank a hundred feet into the soft alluvial soil of the lowlands and he had constantly to watch out for villages and farms. Buddha had not visited Hankow before, but he was expected. Even before the city came into view, the roads were lined with people and the canals and lakes jammed with sampans. Just outside of the city we noticed a small group of men in military uniform under a white flag. We guessed that they represented the communist city government, and so did Kazu, for he set our box beside the group and ordered the spokesman to come in for a parlay. The unfortunate officer who was picked obviously did not relish the idea, particularly after Martin cracked in English, "He doesn't look fat enough." Giving Martin a glare, he drew himself up stiffly and said, "General Soo prepared to die, if necessary for people of China." The communist General showed somewhat less bravado after the stomach turning ascent to the six hundred foot level, but he managed to get off a speech in answer to Kazu's question. As before. Baker gave us a running translation. "He says welcome to Hankow. The people's government, ever responsive to the will of the citizens, joins with all faithful Buddhists in welcoming Buddha, and in expressing heartfelt thanksgiving that rumors claiming Buddha to be a puppet of western imperialists are all false. Now he's saying that there is to be a big party -- a banquet -- for Buddha, in the central square. Rice has been collected and cooked, and a thousand sheep slaughtered to feed hungry Buddha." Kazu replied formally that while he appreciated the hospitality of the people of Hankow, he could not accept food from the enemies of China. These words, which were cl .irly audible to the entire city, WM' f'reeted with cheers by the tl below. The General took anil ill! II m.ulc a neat about face. "L.i.ncral .Soo," said he stoutly. "was communist when he believed communism only hope for China. You have changed everything. General Soo now faithful Buddist!" "May I," said Baker with a grin, "be the first to congratulate General Soo on his penpicacity." ised, there was a great banquet spread. In spite of Soo's protestations, Baker insisted on sampling each course rather extensively for sleeping potions or poison, but either the idea had not occurred to the communists, or there hadn't been enough time, or poison available. For the most part the civil government of Hankow joined with General Soo in a loudly declared conversion to Buddhism without communist trappings. In spite of Baker's skepticism, I believed that most of them were quite sincere. At least, they sincerely wanted to be on the side with the most power, and for the time being at least, Kazu seemed an easy winner. General Soo, in particular, insisted on making a long speech in which he declared the Russians to be the true "western imperialists", now unmasked, who since the days of the first Stalin had sought to enslave China with lies and trickery. Baker shook his head over this, and privately opined that Soo was a very poor fence straddler: such remarks went beyond the needs of expediency, and would probably completely alienate him from the Kremlin. However, the crowd thought it was all fine. Kazu replied with a short, and generally well planned statement of his policy. "Those who follow me," he concluded, "have no easy path. They must be strong, to throw off the yoke of those who would enslave them, but they must be merciful to their enemies in defeat, even to those who but a moment before were at their throats. For though we win the war, if we at the same time forget what we have fought for, then we have indeed lost all. I proclaim to all China, and to her enemies both within and without our borders, that the faith of Buddha has returned, and that interference in China's affairs by any other nation will not be tolerated." Colonel Faulkner had landed at the Hankow airport and now, with his crew, shared our private banquet on the terrace of the city's largest hotel, only a few hundred feet from where Kazu squatted. Under cover of the cheering and speechmaking, he relayed to us some news which he had heard on the radio, which was not quite so rosy. It seemed, first, that the Chinese declared itself for Buddha, and was engaged in a pitched battle with the Manchurian First Army north of Tientsin. The communist garrison at Shanghai, where there was a large population of Russian "colonists", had holed in, awaiting attack by a Buddhist Peoples Army assembled from revolting elements king. A revolt at Canton, far to the south, had been put down by the communists with the aid of air support coming directly from Russia. The most ominous note, however, was a veiled threat by old Mao himself that if mutinous elements did not submit, he might call upon his great ally to the east to use the atomic bomb. Mao spoke apparently from near Peking, where he was assembling the I and V Armies. We digested this news while Kazu finished the last of his # sheep. We all cast anxious glances into the sky. Soviet planes at Canton meant that they could be here also, and Buddha, squatting in a glare of light in the midst of Hankow, was a sitting duck for a bombing attack. As soon as the main part of the formalities were over. Baker managed to get Kazu's attention, and informed him of the situation. Kazu's reaction was immediate and to the point. "We do not await attack. We go north to free our brothers, and to instruct our errant General Mao in Buddha's truth." By the time we were packed and in our travelling box, the time was eight-thirty. Reference to our map showed the airline distance from Hankow to Peking to be about # miles, and Buddha, greatly refreshed by the food and rest, prom' ised to reach the capital by eleven. To make walking easier. Baker plotted a route which avoided the lowlands, particularly the valley of the Yellow River, in favor of a slightly longer course through the mountains to the east. We started northwest, splashing through the swamps and lakes around Hankow at first, and presently reached firmer ground in the Hawiyang Shan. We followed the ridge of these mountains for a time, and then dropped to the hilly country of Honan Province. At first the night was very dark, but presently the light of a waning moon made an occasional fix possible, although navigation was confusing and uncertain at best. We splashed across the Yellow River at ten o'clock, somewhere east of Kaifeng, and for a time were greatly slowed by what appeared to be thick gumbo. Our speed improved once we got up into the rugged Taihang Mountains. Here also we felt safer from air observation or attack, although Kazu was soon panting from the exertion of crossing an endless succession of fifteen to thirty foot ridges. This was indeed rough country, terrain which had protected the lush plains of China for centuries against the Mongols. Here the great wall had been built, and presently, in the moonlight, we saw its trace, winding serpentlike over the mountains. We followed the Wall for almost two hundred miles -- all the way, in fact, to the latitude of Peking -- before we swung east again for the final lap to Mao's capital. D uring the last hour we trailed an antenna and listened in on the world of radio. The news was not good. The Shanghai garrison had sprung a trap on their disorganized attackers, and were marching on Nanking. Mao's armies were closing the southern half of a great pincers on Wu's troops, and only awaited the dawn to launch the final assault. Worst of all, there had been reports of increasing Soviet air activity over the area; a major air strike also apparently would come with daylight. We were scarcely halfway from the edge of the city to the moated summer palace when a small hell of gunfire broke out around Kazu's feet. He jumped, with a roar of pain, and then lashed out with one foot, sweeping away a whole city block and demolishing the ambush. Limping slightly, he made the remaining distance by a less direct route and at last stood at the moat before the palace. The ancient building, and, indeed, everything about, was quite dark. Kazu peered about uncertainly, and then raised our box to ask for advice. Baker was pessimistic. "I don't think you'll find General Mao here. But at this stage of things, I don't believe it would matter if you did. The decision will be made tomorrow by the armies." Kazu stepped carefully over the moat and wall, and sat down wearily in the gardens of the summer palace. We peered with interest at the foliage, marble bridges and the graceful buildings, illuminated only by ghostly moonlight. With Kazu squatting among them, they looked like models, a toy village out of ancient China. I wished that a picture might be taken, for surely never before had Buddha been in so appropriate a setting. While Kazu rested, we examined his feet. A number of machine gun bullets had entered his foot thick hide, and there was one wound a yard long from which oozed a sticky gelatinous blood. There did not appear to be any serious damage, although the chances of infection worried us. In any event, there was nothing we could do except douse it with buckets of water from the moat. Kazu thanked us formally, as befitted a deity, and added, as though talking to himself, "Now is the most difficult time. How can I bring peace without the use of violence? I can appear before these armies and command them to stop. But what if they do not obey? Should I use force? Oh, that I were really the Great Lord Buddha -- then I would have the wisdom, the knowledge that is a thousand times more potent than giant size. Oh Buddha, grant me wisdom, if only for a moment, that I may act rightly." Presently the giant stretched out full length in the garden and, while we kept guard, slept for a time. The first pale glow of dawn appeared soon after five, and we were preparing to awaken Kazu when Martin held up a warning hand. We listened. At first we heard nothing, and then there came a deep drone of jets. Not a single plane, not even a squadron. Nothing less than a great fleet of heavy aircraft was approaching Peking from the west. Baker fired his automatic repeatedly near Kazu's ear, and presently his rumbly breathing changed and he opened his eyes. "Planes," said Baker briefly. "It's not safe here. Better get moving." Kazu sat up, yawning, and we climbed into the box. The giant took a long draught from the nearest fishpond and tied our cage to his neck and shoulder so that both of his hands would be free. By this time the noise of the planes had increased to a roar, which echoed through the silent city. Kazu arose to his full height and waited. A pinkish line of light had now appeared along the eastern horizon which, I realized with consternation, must silhouette the mighty tower of Kazu's body to whomever was coming out of the western shadows. great fleet of heavy bombers, flying high, far beyond even Kazu's reach. Baker seized the glasses to look, and then gave a cry of warning. The leading plane had dropped something -- a black spherical object above which blossomed a parachute. I think that Kazu realized what it was as soon as we, but he still stood quietly. Baker lost whatever calm he had left and screamed, "Run, run -- it's the H-bomb!" but still Kazu did not move. In a moment another of the deadly spheres appeared, directly over us, and then a third. Now at last Kazu moved, but not toward safety. He walked slowly until he was directly beneath the first bomb, and reached up, until his hand was a thousand feet in the air. Down came the bomb, quite rapidly, for the parachute was not very large. "What's the matter with the fool," yelled Martin. But now Baker seemed to get Kazu's idea. "It has barometric fusings -- it's set to detonate at a certain altitude. If that's below a thousand feet, and Kazu can catch it, it won't go off!" Martin started something about detonation at two thousand feet, when Kazu gave a slight jump and his hand closed about the deadly thing, as though he had caught a fly. We cowered, expecting the flash that would mean the end, but nothing happened. In Kazu's crushing grip the firing mechanism was reduced to wreckage before it could act. When Buddha opened his palm-, it contained only a wad of crumpled metal inside of which was a now harmless sphere of plutonium. In quick succession Kazu repeated this performance with the other two bombs, wadded the whole together and flung it to the ground. Then he turned to the north. By the time we had cleared the city, it was quite light, and we could see a dark pall of smoke in the northeast. The armies which had been poised last night had finally met, and a great battle was underway. Kazu hurried towards it, and presently we could hear the crackle of small arms fire and the heavier c.xplosions of mortars and rockets. It took a moment or so for Kazu to ict his hearings. Evidently we were ippiii.n hing Mao's legions from the rear. Still keeping from the adv.uiced to near the battle line, and there stopped. "My brothers," his voice thundered above the heaviest cannon, "my poor brothers on both sides, this useless slaughter. No one can win, and all will -- " Suddenly there was a blinding flash of light, a thousand times brighter than the newly appeared sun. It came from behind us, and in the terrible instant that it remained we could see Buddha's enormous shadow stretching out across the battlefield. Kazu stopped speaking and braced his shoulders for the blast. Subconsciously I was counting seconds. Four, five, six, seven -- A sudden, insane hope gripped me. If we were far enough from the burst -- and then the blast hit us, and with it, the sound. Kazu pitch forward a hundred yards, and stumbled on as far again. Then he recovered. One hand reached behind him, to the back that had taken the full brunt of heat and gamma radiation, and a half animal cry escaped from his lips. Over his shoulder we got a glimpse of the fireball, of the foimtain of color which would presently form the terrible mushroom cloud. The thunder of the explosion reverberated, and was replaced by silence. The crackle of rifles, the thud, of field pieces had ceased. From our perch we looked down at a scene straight from Dante's Inferno. About Kazu's feet was a shallow ravine in which a thousand or so communist troops had taken cover. These were now scrambling and clawing at the sides like ants trying to get away. Vehicles were abandoned, rifles thrown away. A few had been burned, but it seemed that for the most part the soldiers had been sheltered from direct radiation by the wall of their canyon, and by Kazu's great .shadow. For an eternity, it seemed, Kazu stood there, swaying slightly, one hand still pressed against his back, while the little men writhed about his ankles. Then, quite slowly, he raised one foot. I thought that he was going to walk away, but instead, the foot moved deliberately until it was directly over the ravine, and then, like a tremendous pile driver, it descended. A faint and hideous screaming came up to us, which abruptly ended. The foot came up, and again descended, turning back and forth in the yielding earth. Slowly Kazu brought his hand up, and lifted our box so that he could look at us. As he did so, I saw that half of his hand was the color of charcoal, and I smelled a horrible odor of tons of burnt flesh. Now at last he spoke, in a voice that we could scarcely understand. "Guide me," he said, "Guide me, Baker. Guide me to Moscow!" vn K azu walked quite slowly from the battlefield. His gait was unsteady, and at first we feared that he would collapse. We could not tell how deep the bums were, nor whether he was internally hurt by the blast. He appeared to be suffering from some kind of shock, for he did not speak again for a long time. But gradually he seemed to gather himself together, and we became almost convinced that the shock was more psychological than physical, and that even the atom bomb was powerless against his might. We did not remain to see the outcome of the battle, but presently Martin turned the radio on. The news at first was fragmentary. Word that a Russian plane had atom bombed the new Buddha spread across China, and with it ended the last shreds of communist prestige. The armies which had been pro-communist turned on their officers. Mao himself was murdered on the battlefield before Kazu was out of sight. The former red defenders of Shanghai massacred twenty thousand hapless Russian emigrants. All across Asia the story was the same, a terrible revulsion. At first it was believed that Buddha had died instantly; later rumor had it that he had crawled off to Mongolia to die. Radio Moscow at first was silent. The horror of what had been done was too much even for that well oiled propaganda machine. At last a line was patched together: the bomb had been dropped by an American plane, bearing Russian markings. Then Radio Peking announced that Chinese fighters had shot it down and that the crew was Russian. To this Moscow could think of only one reply; Radio Peking was lying; the station had been taken over by the Americans! A little later another Moscow broadcast announced solemnly that the whole story was wrong -- Buddha hadn't been there at all! All the time that this confused flood of talk was circling the globe, Kazu Takahashi, still clinging to the battered steel projection room, was striding across Siberia, staggering now and then, but still maintaining a pace of better than three hundred miles per hour. At first he simply walked westward without any directions from us. By ten o'clock he had put a thousand miles between him and the coast and was well across the southern Gobi desert. Now Baker, who had been almost as stunned as Kazu, began to look into his maps. He had nothing for central Asia as detailed as the charts we had used in Borneo and Celebes, but he presently found a small scale map that would do. With this he identified the snowy range of mountains now towering on our left as the Nan Shan, northernmost bastion of Tibet. He hurriedly called to Kazu to turn northwest before he entered the great Tarim Basin, for the western side of that vast desert was closed by a range of mountains # feet high. Even with the new course, our altitude would be above six thousand feet for many miles. At noon we were paralleling another mighty range, the little known Altai Mountains, and at one o'clock we passed the Zaisan Nor, the great lake which forms the headwaters for the Irtysh River. Here Kazu paused for a drink, and to rime his bums with fresh water. Then we were away again, this time due west over more mountain tops, avoiding the inhabited lowlands. At tlin ithirty the hills dropped away and tin re appeared ahead the infinite green carpet of the Siberian forest. Kazu stopped again at another lake, which Baker guessed might be Dengiz. At four-thirty we crossed a wide river which we could not identify, and then at last commenced to climb into the foothills of the southern Urals. Just in time Baker discovered that Kazu's course was taking him straight toward the industrial city of Magnetogorsk. We veered north again into the higher mountains and then turned east to the forests. We were sure now that Kazu must be delirious, but after a while he stopped at the edge of a lake. "How far are we from Moscow?" he asked. "Twelve hundred miles, more or less," said Baker. "You can make it by nine, maybe ten, tonight." Kazu shook his head. "No. Tonight I must rest, gather strength. We start two AM, arrive Kremlin at sunrise. We catch them same time they catch me. No warning whatever." Kazu lay down on the swampy lake bottom while we huddled on the floor of the box, courting sleep which never came. At one o'clock we at last gave it up, and Baker fired his pistol until Kazu stirred. While he was awakening we listened to the radio. Things had calmed down quite a bit, and as we pieced the various broadcasts together, an amazing realization came over us. Everyone believed that Kazu was dead! Evidently no word of our trip across all of central Asia had been received! Search planes, both Soviet and Chinese, were combing the eastern Gobi for the body. declaration by China upon the Soviet Union, and the announcement that the Russian Politbureau had scheduled a meeting in the Kremlin to consider the emergency. We passed all of this on to Kazu, whose grim face relaxed for the first time in a fleeting grin. "Good reporters. Know what are most savory items. Now guide me well, and away from towns until we reach it." The trip across the Urals and the plains of European Russia retains a nightmare quality in my mind, comparable only with that first night on Yat. Even Baker, who plotted the course, can remember it little better. Now and again we caught glimpses of the dim lights in farms, and once we saw the old moon reflected in the Volga. Much of the low country was covered with ground fog, which reached to Kazu's waist; this, combined with the blackout which had been ordered in every town, made observation by us or the Russians either way difficult. A few people saw Kazu, and their reports reflect a surrealist madness; those who had the horrifying experience of suddenly meeting Buddha in the early morning mists were universally incapable of making any coherent report to the authorities. And then, just as the ghostly false dawn turned the night into a misty gray, we saw ahead the towers of Moscow. Now Kazu increased his speed. Concealment was no longer possible; he must reach the Kremlin ahead of the warning. At # miles per hour Buddha descended upon Moscow. His plunging feet reduced block after block of stores and apartment houses to dust, and the sky behind us was lighted more brightly by the fires he started than by the dull red of the still unrisen sun. Now at last I heard the tardy wail of a siren and saw armored cars darting through the streets. On the roof of an apartment house I glimpsed a crew trying to unlimber an antiaircraft gun, but Kazu saw it also, and smashed the building to rubble with a passing kick. And then we were at the Red Square. St. Basils at one end, the fifty foot stone walls of the Kremlin along one side and Lenin's Tomb like a pile of red children's blocks. Kazu stood for a moment surveying this famous scene, his feet sunk to the ankle in a collapsed subway. It was my first view of the Red Square, and somehow I knew that it would be the last, for anyone. Then Kazu slowly walked to the Kremlin and looked down into it. I remember how suddenly absurd it all seemed. The Kremlin walls, the very symbol of the iron curtain, were scarcely six inches high ! The whole thing was only a child's playpen. But now Kazu had found what he wanted. Without bothering to lift his feet, he crushed through the walls, reached down and pulled the roof from one of the buildings. He uncovered a brightly lighted anthill. Like a dollhouse exposed, he revealed rooms and corridors along which men were running. Kazu dropped to his knees and held our box up so that we might also see. "Are these the men?" he asked. Baker replied in the negative. Kazu abruptly pressed his hand into the building, crushing masonry and timbers and humans all into a heap of dust, and turned to a larger building. As he did, something about it seemed familiar to me. Yes, I had seen it before, in newsreels. It was -- But again Kazu's fingers were at work. Lifting at the eaves, he carefully took off the whole roof. Through a window we saw figures hurrying toward a covered bridge connecting this building with another. At Baker's warning, Kazu demolished the bridge, and then gently began picking the structure to pieces. In a moment we saw what we were after. A wall was pulled down, exposing a great room with oil paintings of Lenin and Stalin on the wall and a long conference table in the center. And clustered between the table and the far wall were a score of men. Anyone would have recognized them, for their faces had gone round the world in po.sters, magazines and newsreels. They were the men of the Politburcau. They were Red Russia's rulers. There was an instant of silent mutual recognition, and then Kazu spnke to them. As befitting a god, hr jioke in their own tongue. Ex#I ily sliat he s.iid I do not know, but alirr a little he.sitation they came aiound the table to the precarious edge of the room where the outer wall had been. Kazu gave further directions and held up our steel box. Fearfully they came forward and jumped the gap into our door. One by one they made the leap, some dressed in the bemedalled uniforms of marshals, others in the semi-military tunics affected by civilian ministers. The last was the man who had succeeded Stalin on his death, and who had taken for himself the same name, as though it were a title. As he entered our room, we saw that he even looked like the first Stalin, clipped hair, moustache and had grown up through the purges-, in a world which knew no mercy, where only the fittest, by communist standards, survived. He had survived, becabse he was merciless and efficient and because he hated the free west with a hatred that was deadly and implacable. thoughts were at that moment. He came because he was ordered to and because he knew the alternative. He knew he was to die, but he obeyed because by so doing he could prolong life a little, and because there was always a chance. At that moment I deeply regretted knowing no Russian. The twenty one who came in talked among themselves in short sentences. They saw us, but ignored us. Baker spoke, first in English and then in German. The one called Stalin understood the German, for he looked at Baker searchingly for a moment, and then turned away. Only one of them replied. This was Malik, the man who wrecked the old United Nations and then became Foreign Minister after Vishinsky was murdered. He ignored the German and spat out his reply in English. "You will not live to gloat over us. He will kill you too, all of you!" We can never be sure of what Kazu planned, because now -- and of this I am certain -- his plans changed. There was suddenly a stillness. We waited. Then I ran to the window and looked upward into the great face. It had changed. A deep weariness and a bewilderment was upon it -- as though Kazu had suddenly sickened of destruction and slaughter. His whispering was the roaring of winds as he said, "No -- no. This is not the way -- not Buddha's way. They must talk. They must understand each other. They must sit at tables and settle their differences, that is my mission." Kazu took five steps. Below us was an airfield. "Can you fly?" he asked us. Chamberlin had been an army pilot in the fifties. Kazu pushed the box up to a transport, an American "Go in this," he said quite clearly. "Go in this plane until you are in Washington. TeU America about me. Tell America I am coming -- that I am bringing -- them. Tell America there must be -- peace." We scrambled out of the steel box, leaving the Russians in a miserable heap in one comer. He arose to his full height and carefully adjusted the cables around his neck. I noticed that his fingers fumbled awkwardly, and that he staggered slightly. Then he spoke once more. "I cannot cross Atlantic. Only route for Buddha is Siberia, Bering Straight, Alaska. But this not take long. You better hurry or I get to Washington first!" He turned on his heel and walked a few steps to the end of the runway. "Now get in plane. I give little help in takeoff!" We climbed into the familiar interior of the big American transport. A moment later it arose silently, vertically like an elevator. Chamberlin, in the pilot's seat, hurriedly started the engines. He leaned from a window and waved his arm, and we shot forward and upward. For a moment the plane wavered and dipped, taking all of Walt's ability to recover. Then with a powerful roar, the big DC# zoomed over the flames of Moscow toward the west. T he flight to London and the Atlantic crossing seemed unreal. We lived beside the radio. War and revolt against the Soviets had broken out everywhere. With the directing power in the Kremlin gone, the top-heavy Soviet bureaucracy was paralyzed. The Yugoslavs marched into the Ukraine, Chinese armies occupied Irkutsk and were pressing across Siberia. Internal revolution broke out at a hundred points once it was learned that Moscow was no more. Eagerly we listened to every report for word of Kazu. At first there was nothing, and then a Chinese plane reported seeing him crossing the Ob River, near the Arctic Circle. They said that he carried a hox in his hand and appeared to be talking to it. Then news from the tiny river settlement of Zhigansk on the Lena that he had passed, but that he limped and staggered as he climbed the mountains beyond. After that, silence. Planes swarmed over eastern Siberia, the Arctic Coast and Alaska, but found nothing. Five hundred tons of C ration were rushed to Fairbanks, and tons of medical supplies for burns and possible illness were readied, but no patient appeared. At first we were hopeful, knowing Kazu's powers. Perhaps he had lost his way, without Baker and the maps, but surely he could not vanish. As the days passed Baker became more worried. "It's the radiation," he explained. "He took the full dose of gamma rays right in his back. He might go on for days, and then suddenly keel over. He's had a bad burn outside, but it's nothing to what it did to him internally." So the days passed, and so gradually hope died. And then, at last, there was news. It came, belatedly, Iroin an eskimo hunter on the PriI I ported that a great sea god had Ins head vanished into the clouds. But, he was a sick god, for he could hardly stand, and soon crawled on his hands. Around his neck, said the eskimo, he carried a charm, and he spoke words to this in a strange tongue. And the charm answered him in the same tongue, and with the voice of a man. And the two spoke to each other for a time and then the great one arose and walked off of the island and into the fog and the ocean. Questioned, the man was somewhat vague as to the exact direction taken, although it seemed clear that Kazu had headed south. When Baker examined his chart of Bering Sea, he found that the ocean to the north and west, towards Siberia, was shallow -- less than five hundred feet. But the Pribolofs stood on the edge of a great deep. Only twenty miles south of the islands, the ocean floor dropped off to more than ten thousand feet, for three himdred miles of icy fog shrouded ocean, before the laleak Aleutians arose out of the mists. This desolate area was searched for months by ships and planes, but no trace ever appeared from the treacherous currents of the stormy sea. Kazu had vanished. So here ended the story of Kazu Takahashi, who was born in the days of the first bomb, and who died by the last ever to sear the to be the incarnation of the Lord Buddha, but to four men he was known not as a god but as a great and good man. The dawning of intelligence is sometimes the greatest tragedy of all. By Richard Matheson H e stepped into the sunlight and walked among the people. His feet carried him away from the black tube depths. The distant roar of underground machinery left his brain to be replaced by myriad whispers of the city. Now he was walking the main street. Men of flesh and men of steel passed him by, coming and going. His legs moved slowly and his footsteps were lost in a thousand footsteps. He passed a building that had died in the last war. There were scurrying men and robots pulling off the rubble to build again. Over their heads hung the control ship and he saw men looking down to see that work was done properly. He slipped in and out among the crowd. No fear of being seen. Only inside of him was there a difference. Eyes would never know' it. Visio-poles set at every corner could not glean the change. In form and visage he was just like all the rest. He looked at the sky. He was the only one. The others didn't know about the sky. It was only when you broke away that you could see. He saw a rocket ship flashing across the sun and control ships hovering in a sky rich with blue and fluffy clouds. The dull-eyed people glanced at him suspiciously and hurried on. The blank-faced robots made no sign. They clanked on past, holding their envelopes and their packages in long metal arms. He lowered his eyes and kept walking. A man cannot look at the sky, he thought. It is suspect to look at the sky. "Would you help a buddy?" He paused and his eyes flicked down to the card on the man's chest. Ex-Space Pilot. Blind. Legalized Beggar. Signed by the stamp of the Control Commissioner. He put his hand on the blind man's shoulder. The man did not speak but passed by and moved on, his cane clacking on the sidewalk until he had disappeared. It was not allowed to beg in this district. They would find him soon. He turned from watching and strode on. The visio-poles had seen him pause and touch the blind man. It was not permitted to pause on business streets; to touch another. He passed a metal news dispenser and, brushing by, pulled out a sheet. He continued on and held it up before his eyes. Income Taxes Raised. Military Draft Raised. Prices Raised. Those were the story heads. He turned it over. On the back was an editorial that told why Earth forces had been compelled to destroy all the Martians. Something clicked in his mind and his fingers closed slowly into a light fist. lie passed his people, men and robots both. What distinction now? he asked himself. The common d.i r s did the same work as the robots. Together they walked or drove through the streets carrying and delivering. To be a man, he thought. No longer is it a blessing, a pride, a gift. To be brother to the machine, used and broken by invisible men who kept their eyes on poles and their fists bunched in ships that hung over all their heads, waiting to strike at opposition. When it came to you one day that this was so, you saw there was no reason to go on with it. H e stopped in the shade and his eyes blinked. He looked in the shop window. There were tiny baby creatures in a cage. Buy a Venus Baby For Your Child, said the card. He looked into the eyes of the small tentacled things and saw there intelligence and pleading misery. And he passed on, ashamed of what one people can do to another people. Something stirred within his body. He lurched a little and pressed his hand against his head. His shoulders twitched. When a man is sick, he thought, he cannot work. And when a man cannot work, he is not wanted. He stepped into the street and a huge Control truck grounrd to a stop inches before him. He walked away jerkily, leaped upon the sidewalk. Someone shouted and he ran. Now the photo-cells would follow him. He tried to lose himself in the moving crowds. People whirled by, an endless blur of faces and bodies. They would be searching now. When a man stepped in front of a vehicle he was suspect. To wish death was not allowed. He had to escape before they caught him and took him to the Adjustment Center. He couldn't bear that. People and robots rushed past him, messengers, delivery boys, the bottom level of an era. All going somewhere. In all these scurrying thousands, only he had no place to go, no bimdle to deliver, no slavish duty to perform. He was adrift. Street after street, block on block. He felt his body weaving. He was going to collapse soon, he felt. He was weak. He wanted to stop. But he couldn't stop. Not now. If he paused -- sat down to rest -- they would come for him and take him to the Adjustment Center. He didn't want to be adjusted. He didn't want to be made once more into a stupid shuffling machine. It was better to be in anguish and to understand. He stumbled on. Bleating horns tore at his brain. Neon eyes blinked down at him as he walked. He tried to walk straight but his system was giving way. Were they following? He would have to be careful. He kept his face blank and he walked as steadily as he could. His knee-joint stiffened and, as he bent to rub It in his hands, a wave of darkness leaped from the ground and clawed at him. He staggered against a plate glass window. He shook his head and saw a man staring from inside. He pushed away. The man came out and stared at him in fear. The photocells picked him up and followed him. He had to hurry. He couldn't be brought back to start all over again. He'd rather be dead. A sudden idea. Cold water. Only to drink? I'm going to die, he thought. But I win know why I am dying and that will be different. I have left the laboratory where, daily, I was sated with cdculations for bombs and gases and bacterial sprays. All through those long days and nights of plotting destruction, the truth was growing in my brain. Connections were weakening, indoctrinations faltering as effort fought with apathy. d, finally, something gave, and all that was left was weariness and truth and a great desire to be at peace. And now he had escaped and he would never go back. His brain had snapped forever and they would never adjust him again. He came to the citizen's park, last outpost for the old, the crippled, the useless. Where they could hide away and rest and wait for death. He entered through the wide gate and looked at the high walls which stretched beyond eye. The walls that hid the ugliness from outside eyes. It was safe here. They did not care if a man died inside the citizen's park. This is my island, he thought. I have found a silent place. There are no probing photo-cells here and no ears listening. A person can be free here. His legs felt suddenly weak and he leaned against a blackened dead tree and sank down into the mouldy leaves lying deep on the ground. An old man came by and stared at him suspiciously. The old man walked on. He could not stop to talk for minds were still the same even when the shackles had been burst. Two old ladies passed him by. They looked at him and whispered to one another. He was not an old person. He was not allowed in the citizen's park. The Control Police might follow him. There was danger and they hurried on, casting frightened glances over their lean shoulders. When he came near they scurried over the hill. He walked. Far off he heard a siren. The high, screeching siren of the Control Police cars. Were they after him? Did they know he was there? He hurried on, his body twitching as he loped up a sunbaked hill and down the other side. The lake, he thought, I am looking for the lake. He saw a fountain and stepped down the slope and stood by it. There was an old man bent over it. It was the man who had passed him. The old man's lips enveloped the thin stream of water. He stood there quietly, shaking. The old man did not know he was there. He drank and drank. The water dashed and sparkled in the sun. His hands reached out for the old man. The old man felt his touch and jerked away, water running across his gray bearded chin. He backed away, staring openmcfuthed. He turned quickly and hobbled away. He saw the old man run. Then he bent over the fountain. The water gurgled into his mouth. It ran down and up into his mouth and poured out again, tastelessly. denly, a sick burning in his chest. The sun faded to his eye, the sky became black. He stumbled about on the pavement, his mouth opening and closing. He tripped over the edge of the walk and fell to his knees on the dry ground. He crawled in on the dead grass and fell on his back, his stomach grinding, water running over his chin. He lay there with the sun shining on his face and he looked at it without blinking. Then he raised his hands and put them over his eyes. An ant crawled across his wrist. He looked at it stupidly. Then he put the ant between two fingers and squashed it to a pulp. He sat up. He couldn't stay where he was. Already they might be searching the park, their cold eyes scanning the hills, moving like a horrible tide through this last outpost where old people were allowed to think if they were able to. He got up and staggered around clumsily and started up the path, stiff-legged, looking for the lake. He turned a bend and walked in a weaving line. He heard whistles. He heard a distant shout. They were looking for him. Even here in the citizen's park where he thought he could escape. And find the lake in peace. He passed an old shut down merry-go-round. He saw the little wooden horses in gay poses, galloping high and motionless, caught fast in time. Green and orange with heavy tassels, all thick-covert with dust. He reached a sunken walk and started down it. There were gray stone walls on both sides. Sirens were all around in the air. They knew he was loose and they were coming to get him now. A man could not escape. It was not done. He shuffled across the road and moved up the path. Turning, he saw, far off, men running. Tltey wore black uniforms and they were waving at him. He hurried on, his feet thudding endlessly on the concrete walk. He ran off the path and up a hill and tumbled in the grass. He crawled into scarlet-leaved bushes and watched through waves of dizziness as the men of the Control Police dashed by. Then he got up and started off, limping, his eyes staring ahead. At last. The shifting, dull glitter of the lake. He hurried on now, stumbling and tripping. Only a little way. He lurched across a field. The air was thick with the smell of rotting grass. He crashed through the bushes and there were shouts and someone fired a gun. He looked back stiffly to see the men running after hhn. He plunged into the water, flopping on his chest with a great spl. He struggled forward, walking oh the bottom until the water had flooded over his chest, his shoulders, his head. Still walking while it washed into bis mouth and filled his throat and weighted his body, dragging him down. His eyes were wide and staring as he slid gently forward onto his face on the bottom. His fingers closed in the silt and he made no move. L ater, the Control Police dragged him out and threw him in the black truck and drove off. And, inside, the technician tore off the sheeting and shook his head at the sight of tangled coils and water-soaked machinery. "They go bad," he muttered as he probed with pliers and picks, "They crack up and think they are men and go wandering. Too bad they don't work as good as people."  'i A 'I . x.' rA ' The bombs fell down from a steel-blue sky. And the long, long night began Where hellhounds ran with eerie cries And the beastling -- chained -- was man. Running Hounds By John W. Jakes wine and set the mug down carefully on the scarred wooden table. The old woman hummed softly to herself as she stirred the great black kettle that boiled in the fireplace. Outside the window, Jordan could see night creeping down the orange sky. The hills were endless rolls of thatched shadow. In the courtyard, the dogs bayed and snuffled hungrily over the meat scraps he had bought for them. The other two travelers were watching him. They had been watching him since his arrival. One leaned back against the wall in a chair, idly strumming a guitar. Dirty hair matted his forehead. His chubby face was a mask of innocence. Jordan catalogued him, from his clothing, as a migratory worker. But if you judged by the pistols in his belt and the expression on his face, then the appraisal was disturbing. The second man was near fifty, tall and stooping. His suit was of black rough cloth. A wide black hat sat on his angular head, throwing shadow on his forehead and hooking nose -- his narrow lips and filthy chin stubble. Jordan decided it was time to move on. These two might be growing suspicious. There were many suspicious people in the world now and the only way to escape them was to keep running. And all because you were branded with a sign of hate. Jordan sighed and stared back into the wine cup. He was tired of running. But he prepared to rise, hitching up the belt about his waist, making certain his knife was secure. The tall stooped man chewed from a meat bone, wiped grease from his lips, and walked over to Jordan's table. "You a stranger in this territory?" "That's right -- I am." "Those your dogs out there -- they yours?" "Yes, they're mine." "What business you in?" The man's tone was persistent. Jordan breathed heavily. "I hunt," he replied, looking at the dusty spinning wheel in one comer, from the ceiling; at anything but the hunched man. "I hunt and sell the skins." The hunched man brushed back the edges of his coat. Two pistol butts thrust forward as he sat down. "And I suppose you travel," he said with feigned friendliness. "Risky, traveling. Never do it, if I can help it. Never can tell when somebody you meet might be a -- " He paused and tapped his fingers on the table. " I sorcerer." Joidan stiffened, then hoped the other hadn't noticed. Sorcerer. That meant scientist. His father had been a scientist, far back in a dim time when all he remembered were bright blue mornings and silver buildings in the sun. Then great blooming clouds, and noise, and no more buildings. He had never known his father. But the black question mark burned into the small of his back at the prison camp, years before, told him that someone had known his father was a scientist. "I hate sorcerers," the man against the wall said. "I hate 'em so much, I kill 'em. I like to kill 'em. I like to kill anybody, only nobody hates anybody but sorcerers, so I kill 'em." He tittered loudly, fingering the guitar. Jordan felt die anger rising in him, but he kept quiet. "I hate them, too," the man in black said, "because they killed my wife and my children. When the blowups came, somebody exploded the factory in our town. I was away when it happened, that's why I'm here. The whole world got blown up, I didn't mind that. But our town, and my folks -- " Jordan could see a different kind of madness in this stranger. Vengeful, misguided. He wondered how long he would have to sit and talk. "Now," said the tall man, "they call me Red Henry, the witch killer." One long knotty hand constricted. "An eye for an eye." T he instinct for safety was strong in Jordan, but this man stirred him deeply. "I think you're wrong. A lot of people are wrong. The science men aren't devils. They didn't cause the blowups. A few wanting power took the weapons the science men made. They caused the blowups." Red Henry was staring into space. He didn't seem to hear. "We'll get 'em," the man against the wall said. "We'll get 'em, wherever they are. Still lots of 'em running around, hidin' in thickets, crawlin' out at night, but we'll get 'em!" He giggled once more. "If you do," Jordan replied quickly, "you'll wipe out the only chance we have to survive. Those men made progress. When others -- bad men -- took the progress and used it for themselves, then came the darkness." "I don't like those words," Red Henry said, blinking. The other man was on his feet. In his hand was a pistol. He pointed it at Jordan. Lamplight winked off its barrel, and the old woman wasn't stirring her kettle any more. "I don't want any trouble, Lukey," she said. "My inn's got a reputation for no trouble." "He sounds like a sorcerer," Lukey replied, walking to the table. "He sure enough sounds like a sorcerer, and you know what we do with them." Tensing Jordan darted his eyes around the room. Night had closed in over the courtyard, and his dogs were silent. Lukey stopped in front of the table and drew his other gun. He thumbed back the hammers with little snicking sounds. The woman watched fearfully, knotting up her plaid apron. "Move out of the way, Henry," Lukey cackled. "I want to me this clean and nice." Red Henry waved a hand. "First we find out if he's one of them. Then we fix him. Only we do it my way. We don't make it nice and clean. We make it long. Stand up, stranger, and take off your shirt." Jordan pushed back the bench and got to his feet. Four blue gun snouts were aimed at him. "Drop the knife on the table," Red Henry ordered. Jordan pulled it from the sheath and let it fall. The black kettle hissed and ran over, but the woman paid no attention. "Hurry him up," Lukey laughed. "We ain't had a witch man for a long time." "We got plenty of time," Red Henry stated flatly. Jordan's belly felt cold. Mechanically, he slipped his hands under the edge of his tunic, pulling it upward and off his head. "Now," said Red Henry, "turn around." Jordan turned, and stopped breathing. The room was very quiet for a moment, and then Lukes giggle came bubbling up. "There it is, all right! Let me put a bullet there, Henry!" "The mark," came the other's sonorou.s voice. "The sign of those who sought the dark mysteries no man should know." Jordan heard a grunt, and a gun barrel raked along his back, leaving a stinging trail of pain. "A family," Red Henry said heavily. "A whole family killed, because of you and your kind. The whole world blown up in a devil's war. Well, this is one more we'll repay. You've got the sign that can't be taken off -- you're one of them." "Yes," Jordan said, "I am one of them. My father was a scientist, and I'm glad of that." "Fine," Red Henry muttered, "just fine... "Please," came the voice of the woman, "not in here, Henry. Take him outside. Don't do anything in here." Jordan stared at the rough plank wall. Red Henry said, "Turn around again." Red Henry kept watching him as he said to the woman, "You got a whip around here?" "In the shed." "Get it, Lukey." Reluctantly, Lukey put away his guns and vanished through a back room. He returned shortly with a long stretch of rawhide. Henry stuck one gun in his belt and hefted the whip. Ordering Lukey to take the lantern, he motioned Jordan to the front door. They stepped out into the courtyard. Jordan's dogs, three lean and dirty gray wolfhounds, jumped at his legs, pink tongues lapping his boots. "Down," Jordan ordered harshly, "down!" They slunk back, out of the circle of lantern light, and watched, tongues lolling, animal eyes alight. The evening wind ran over Jor(i.iii with cold hands, and the dark til I rustled softly. Beyond the hills, the sky was a pale bowl of small I #I vour hands in back of your #I il," K(I Henry said, going liuiii ol liim, guns trained on his stomach, joyously anticipating the spectacle. footsteps retreating. He heard the flat sliding of a whip laid out along the ground. He tensed, seeing his dogs crouching lean, deadly and wolf-like, near the wall. Now he would find out just how good they were. "An eye," breathed Red Henry somewhere, "for an eye..." Coils of fire lashed around Jordan's body. Simultaneously, he screamed orders to the dogs and grabbed the whip. He dived for the ground, pulling on the lash, and went tumbling over and over in the dirt. A gun exploded over his head and there was a groan. The dogs were on Lukey, biting and tearing at him. Fangs flashed and came away red and sticky. Lukey squalled. Jordan rolled over quickly. Red Henry was clutching his side. Lukey's shot -- missing Jordan -- had struck him. Jordan got to his feet, catching up the whip from where it had fallen from Henry's lax hands. He unwound it as he ran. Lukey clubbed feebly at the dogs. Jordan ran across the yard, scooping up a pistol from the dust. There was another explosion, whirling him around. His arm throbbed abruptly and became wet. Blue smoke curled from Red Henry's gun. Jordan struck the gun away. Henry glared, holding his side -- panting. "Kill me, devil," he whispered. "Add another link to the chains tying you up in hell." Jordan's finger tightened on the trigger. Sweat and blood ran down his other arm. He felt the muscles tightening and tightening -- Doubt welled up. Abruptly, he turned away, calling off the dogs. Lukey was a sodden mass in the dirt. Jordan touched him with his boot. There was a faint moan from the ragged throat. The dogs snuflfled, rubbing against Jordan's legs. He patted them, even as he began running toward the dark hills. His arm burned hanging loose beside him. He raced up the hill, the dogs running near him. At the crest of the slope, he turned and glanced down at the inn yard. The woman was in the doorway, shaking a charm bag to ward off demons. Red Henry stood near Lukey's corpse, eyes searching the night. One arm was clutched to his body, and was black with blood. The other held the lantern high. He was like some stooped malignant god. His mouth moved, and the words were carried to Jordan by the wind. "... ni find you... you can't run far... I'll find you... witch hunt... A prophet, thought Jordan, standing on the hill with the wind rushing by. A prophet of ignorance, turning the world into a black land of superstition and fear, and vengeance. But we can rebuild -- we must rebuild! We won't be outcasts forever! But now, there was the necessity of escape. The country was unfamiliar, as was all the country he had traveled through. It was hostile, and every person and every building might be deadly. Henry and Lukey and the inn had been deadly. Jordan's arm hurt. "Run," he whispered to the dogs. They ran across the open country. The dogs whined. He stumbled up one dark hill, down, and up another. A thousand hills -- unfriendly -- each one higher and steeper than the last. The stars peered down. The wind was hot. He ran in a churning sea of liquid. He staggered to the top of another hill and paused. He called the dogs to a stop. He tried to move forward again and stumbled. His knees fell away under him and he rolled down the hill, bumping his arm and feeling fresh pieces of fire in him. At last, he came to a stop in the grass at the hill bottom. The dogs lapped his face with their warm tongues. The winds whispered telling him that far back in the night a great devil hunt was beginning. The dogs whimpered but he did not hear... T he first sensation was one of heat. His back was covered with warmth. Next, he became aware of the grass imder his stomach. It was scratching his skin. He opened one eye, then the other. He waited for feeling to take hold thoroughly. It moved quickly ders, his legs, his arms. The pain from the wound had been reduced to a steady ache. He turned over and lay on his back, gathering strength. The morning sky overhead was a sheet of polished blue. He saw trees on a hilltop, lacy and nodding. Wild birds called shrilly. The morning world was a warm and friendly place. Bui not for him... Memory of the preceding night returned. Hastily, he stumbled to his feet. He had to go on. He had to keep running... The dogs opened their eyes with faint hungry growls. His own stomach rattled in emptiness, but there was no food. "Come on," he said, weakly, "we've got to move." They rose and trotted along beside him as he lurched up the next hill. He pulled back his sleeve as he walked, examining the wound. He felt suddenly sick. Stiunbling over the brow of a hill, he halted, knowing his wound would require attention before very long, if he was to escape infection. The hills ran on endlessly, vanishing in a hazy blue-green line far in the distance. There were no towns -- no buildings. Only a road about half a mile away, winding like a dirty snake through the woodlands. He had started on down the hill when his eyes caught a line of dust rising from where the road dipped. The dogs growled their hunger. Jordan pulled the pistol from his belt and loped down the hill. Dust meant someone on the road, perhaps someone on a horse. The dogs ran low over the ground beside him, quiet now. His arm began to beat with a throbbing rhythm that corresponded to his pounding heart. The breath tore in and out of his chest, but he kept up the pace, making himself run -- run -- The last hill was ahead. It seemed to tower like a mountain into the blue infinity of the sky. Hq choked weakly and struggled for the top. The world, grown hazy black, swam into focus again. He seized a root and pulled himself upward. The moving line of dust floated over the hilltop. His margin would be narrow. The dogs were already near the summit. Letting out a tom gust of air, he stumbled. Even with the rest he had gotten, his legs were weak -- drained of strength by the damaged arm. He retched and crawled to the crest of the hill on his knees. Without looking down at the road, he thrust the gun out and croaked "Stop!" He could do nothing more than hold the gun and wait while the sound of his voice floated away on the wind. The bright sky was motionless, the clouds gone. The dogs stood alertly beside him, ears erect, tongues hanging over white teeth. A gypsy wagon, pulled by two horses with sore-ridden hides, stood in the center of the road. Faint trails of dust still drifted from the big rear wheels. The side was painted with red and gold letters that said, Spanio The Clown  Company. A man and a girl watched him from the wagon seat. The man was stout, yet hungry looking. His green and yellow harlequin's suit was baggy, frayed and ill-fitting. A worn peaked cap with little bells was on his head. The girl was yellow-haired and skinny. Her mouth was daubed with too much red lip paint. The split flaring skirt displayed legs that needed flesh, and the white blouse revealed the tops of breasts that might once have been attractive. She was much younger than the man, but their faces both bore suffering and starvation and loneliness like livid brands. Jordan felt a quick, unexplainable kinship. He stood up and walked unsteadily down the hill, the dogs at his heel. "What do you want with us?" the man asked. "We have no money." "I don't want that," Jordan replied. "I want you to let me ride with you. My arm is hurt. I can't walk and I've got to -- " He almost said get away, but checked himself. They might be tech-haters. The girl glared at him, as if she were used to arguing and fighting. "Why should we help you?" "My gun," he muttered. She made a disgusted noise and reached for the reins, but the man pushed her aside. "He is hurt, Jenny. We should help him." "But he might be pretending," she whispered intently. "We must reach Mount Gabriel, father..." "Stop talking," Jordan ordered. "I'm going to climb inside the wagon." He held his teeth together against the pain and took a step. Again his legs dissolved beneath him. He pawed the air with his good hand. The gun fell into the dust and he clutched at the wheel, leaning his head against the wood, trying to fight back the closing dark. Dimly, he heard someone jump from the seat. A hand pulled at his shoulder. New agony burned through him. "Let loose of the wheel," the girl was saying fiercely, "let loose -- " He felt Itis tunic rip. His cheek was pressed against the rough wood of a wheel spoke. The girl's voice was a whisper. "Father... he's got the black mark on his back!" "Are you sure?" Bells jingled and the shirt was lifted away. "Quickly," came the man's voice. "Put him in the wagon. I'll drive. You attend to the wound. Make him comfortable." Jordan felt hands lifting him, up and up and up... H e lay on a pile of skins inside the wagon. They were stopped in a roadside glade. The girl gave him a wine jar and he took a long drink, feeling comfort in his stomach. He began to gnaw on a slice of rye bread the girl offered. Then she leaned back on thin haunches and watched him. The man in the harlequin costume sat on the tailgate, holding the cap in his hand and idly jingling the bells. "You're a scientist," he said. Jordan stiffened. The girl laughed shortly and pulled down one side of her blouse. A black question mark was branded into the skin, just behind the armpit. "Don't be afraid. We've both got them." "My name is Spain," the man said. "I trust you because no one who was in his right mind would purposely have that brand on him. I was -- a chemist, once." His eyes brimmed with remembrance. "You travel disguised as a clown?" Jordan asked curiously. long time, hiding in a cave near the university they burned after the blowup. But word came from Mount Gabriel, and friends got us these clothes and this wagon. My daughter and I started out." He brushed a hand across his face. "I went to college, once. And I used to sing and dance quite a bit. Social entertainer." The girl studied Jordan with deep pity as her father continued, "We're going to Mount Gabriel, because in that town, scientists are gathering!" Jordan sat up, alert in spite of the wounded arm. "Word came secretly," Spain related. "All the scientists of this country are gathering there, to wait for the time when people won't be afraid of us. That time will come -- certainly. It's a deserted town, no one goes there any more. But we'll wait and our time will come -- "I've hoped that there might be such a place," Jordan said. "I would like to go with you." "Not before we stop in the next town and attend to your wound," Jenny said. "It'd be dangerous to leave it alone, and we don't have any medical supplies with us." "You don't understand. Someone will be hunting me. The towns will be dangerous." "Someone is hunting all of us," the girl said. Jordan shook his head stubbornly. "One man is hunting me." He told them about Red Henry, and the fight at the inn. "He waits for an opportunity to kill, anyone with a black question mark on them. He blames all scientists for what happened to his family. He knows I'm wounded, and he'll direct all his energy to finding me. Towns -- " Spain waved him silent. "That chance we'll have to take." He dropped off the tailgate, replaced his cap and looked at the sky. The wagon began to roll. The rocking motion soothed him, made him tired. He lay back on the skins and watched the wooden ceiling. Jenny sat beside him. "I wish you'd go past the town," he said half-heartedly. "I'll be all right." She didn't answer. He felt warm fingers touch his skin. "Rest now." Her voice had lost some of its harsh stridency. "Rest and get back your strength." The warm fingers stayed on his skin, clinging there, as if they had found something in a lonely world. The wagon rocked on, and the ceiling grew darker as the sun fell in the west. Mount Gabriel. The name echoed in his thoughts. Red Henry was searching for him, but somewhere ahead in the vast wild lands of witchcraft and fear, there was sanctuary. Only a few more desperate miles -- rest -- let the strength seep back into tsvisted empty muscles -- rest -- He heard the dogs barking playfully as they followed along behind. Then even that became distant... N ight had come when they reached a town. Jordan was perched on the wagon seat between Jenny and her father. He felt rested and fairly strong. The horses shambled wearily down a tree-covered lane. Jordan saw a sign hanging blasted and askew in the starlight. Galena Junction, Pop. #, A Fine Town For Work And Play. The letters were faded and streaked with rain water. Jordan laughed silently. The streets were dusty, quiet. Houses showed lines of lamplight behind shutters, but no face looked out inquisitively as the horses moved with a soft, rhythmic plopping. "We'll tie the wagon up ahead," Spain announced, "and act like we're staying for the night." He indicated the town square. Glass faces of shops stared vacantly. Bricks were scarred with soot. The courthouse lawn was overgrown with weeds, and a stack or iron cannonballs decorated one comer. Lanterns hung on posts aU about the square, casting tall shadows on the emptiness. The wagon pulled into the square and Spain drew it to a stop near the shattered courthouse steps. "We've got to be out of here by dawn," he said. "It isn't safe to be in a town at all, much less in the daylight." "Then let's move on right now," Jordan insisted. Spain shook his head stubbornly. "That wound needs attention. We'll -- " He sat up straight, eyes darting to the vacant street on his left. "Quiet!" Four men in work clothes and wide hats were coming around the courthouse and toward the wagon. Shotguns protruded from the crooks of their elbows. Jenny whispered to Jordan, "Dad will talk to them." The four men walked up to the wagon, shotguns glinting. "Make some light, pilgrims," one of them said. Jenny fished out a match, stmck it, and put it to the lantern hanging from the lip of the wagon roof. Gold light spilled over the knot of shadow that was the men. Their faces were bearded and thin and suspicious. The leader had spots of food on his shirt front and black sweat rings under his arms. He examined the sign on the side of the wagon and asked, "What's your business in Galena Junction, pilgrims?" "We're entertainers," Spain said with mock joviality. "We have a little show, my friend. We've been on the road all day, and we decided to stop in this peaceful little town and present our show tomorrow morning." He added fawningly, "If that's all right with you." The man grunted meaninglessly. One of the others lit a cigar and exhaled puffs of blue smoke that whirled upward in the night air. His eyes crawled over Jenny. He grinned and switched his gaze to Jordan. He frowned. "All of you in the show?" he asked. Jordan reached behind the seat, hiding his movement with his body. His fingers closed about the butt of a pistol. He listened for the dogs, heard them sniffling somewhere at the side af the wagon. He stared back at the four men. "Of course we're all in the show," Spain boomed. The echoes bounced off the buildings. "Spanio and Company, that's what the sign says." The leader said, "That's what it says all right. Keep your wagon here till morning. Come on, boys." They walked back the way they had come. Just as they were about to round the comer of the courthouse, the one with the cigar glanced back to where the three sat in the lantern glow. Jordan held himself steady, not lowering his eyes as he wanted to, but keeping them fixed on the horses. After a minute, Jenny sighed and said, "They're gone." Jordan glanced quickly to the street. It was empty. Blue wisps of smoke floated under one of the lamp posts. He examined his arm. A soggy red stain had come through onto the shirt. "He saw I was wounded," Jordan said abruptly. "One of them was looking at my arm. I didn't know it had soaked through." "And we still don't know where the doctor lives," Spain added. "That means hunting for him. It may be dangerous, with them patrolling like that. Jenny, drive around to the other side of the courthouse." He pointed off to the right with one hand, extinguishing the lantern with the other. "When we come to that patch of shadow, Jordan and I will get off. You stay here, climb into the back and keep quiet. If they come back, maybe they'll think we're sleeping." She started to protest, but Spain silenced her with a hand to his lips. He gave her the reins. Reluctantly, she pulled them to the right, and the wagon began to move. As they swung around the corner of the square, Spain motioned and jumped quickly from the seat. Jordan followed, landing with a thud that jarred pain along his arm. They ran through the murky blackness and flattened themselves against a shop front, watching. Jenny drove to the appointed position, dropped the reins and vanished from the seat. The dogs settled down behind the wheels. "All right," Spain whispered. "Let's move." They slipped into an alley and ran down to the next street. There were houses here, but no lights. Jordan took one side, Spain the other. They examined each gate, peering in the starlight for a sign indicating a doctor. "Nothing," Jordan called softly as he reached the end of the block. Spain motioned to a cross street and they began their search once more. Somewhere in this dark maze of streets there had to be a doctor. A thin sliver of moon crept over the housetops. Trees on the lawns sighed comfortingly, and Jordan felt again the stinging loneliness that belonged to him and his kind. The houses were dark, but secure, even with their superstitions. A gain the street produced nothing. They turned one more corner. Half way down the block, Jordan saw a black square hung from a gatepost. He strained to make out the lettering. M. Rayburn, Medicines. Two words had been added -- painted on in a hasty scrawl. After the blowup, Jordan thought bitterly. The sign now read Medicines and Spells. He motioned to Spain. The older man moved across the street, crouching low, holding the bells on his cap to keep them from jingling. Jordan pushed the gate open. Boards groaned and creaked as they moved up the walk and onto the frame porch. No light showed within. Spain fumbled for the bell, breathing heavily. "I've got my gun ready," Jordan said. Spain beat upon the door. They waited tensely, listening. No sound came to their ears except the wind in the dark trees. Spain knocked a second time. A spot of light shimmered beyond the cut-glass doorpane. It enlarged slowly, accompanied by footsteps. A shadow fell on the glass from inside. It held a lamp high and reached out and opened the door. A wizened old man in a night shirt looked out at them apprehensively. "What do you want?" "My friend has a wounded arm," Spain told him. "I want you to fe it." "Go away," the old man mumbled, trying to close the door. "Go away and leave me alone." Jordan lifted his gun and pointed it at the old man's head. Rheumy eyes widened in fright. "Stand back," Spain said. "We're coming in." The old man shufBed backwards, the fear of the unknown -- bom when the bombs fell -- welling up in him. Jordan and Spain walked into the hall. "Put out your light," Jordan said. The old man turned down the lamp as Spain closed the front door. "Now lead us to your office," Jordan ordered. They walked through a musky parlor smelling of lavender, and the man called Rayburn, pushed back another door, turning up his lamp. He stood shuffling his veined hands nervously, ludicrous in the baggy night shirt. "Terrible," he kept mumbling. "Terrible to open at night. Night is the time when they wk -- " "Keep quiet," Spain said. They surveyed the room. All the standard medical equipment was present. There was a desk and a reclining table and a case containing instruments that glittered with a white silver sheen behind glass doors. The room smelled of cool antiseptic. But there were other objects. A wooden vampire stake hung on one wall. A witch-cross twined with wolfbane hung on anodier. Charm bags littered the desk, and a porcelain slab showed an uncompleted mess of clay, hair and fingernail parings. A bare human skull gaped in crazy mirth from atop the instrument case. "Who are you?" Rayburn asked querulously. "What are you running from? Or are you -- sorcerers?" Jordan felt the same anger rise that had come with the words of Red Henry back at the inn. He shifted the gun to his weak hand and pulled up his tunic as he turned around. His mouth twisted. "Take a look -- doctor." Rayburn choked in a highpitched voice and cowered back. "Devils! Black spawn of hell!" The sagging flesh on his jowls quivered. "Spawn of hell or not," Spain replied, "you're going to take that bullet out of his arm." "I won't! I won't help your kind!" "Would you like me to put a curse on you?" Jordan asked with sudden insight. His voice carried malicious overtones, partly jest, partly sick irony. "Would you like your bones to dissolve and your flesh to drop off in rotten pieces? I can do that, doctor, because I'm one of them!" Rayburn put his face in his hands and sobbed softly. Then he looked up, trembling. "Take off your shirt." Jordan handed the gun to Spain. He pulled his tunic off his good arm, then over his head, and finally removed it from the wounded arm. Sitting on the long table, he watched Rayburn gathering the j.TTs of antiseptic and the instruments from the case where the skull grinned. I Ir shambled over to Jordan and il.iubod at the wound with some liquid from a black bottle. Jordan v i iidered if it was alcohol. It didn't I me lie was puzzled. I'hrn Rayburn got a gourd rattle li.M ii.ied siiK'crity, he began to shake it back and forth before the wound. "What are you doing?" Spain asked sharply. "Proceeding by ritual," Rayburn whined. "I must do it this way." Jordan saw that the liquid had made his woimd flesh-colored. He picked up the bottle. "What is this?" "Devil cleanser," the man quaked. Jordan corked the bottle and handed it to Spain. "Devil cleanser. Flesh colored paint. Use it for clown makeup." Spain dropped the bottle in one voluminous pocket of his harlequin suit. 'Torget ritual," Jordan said. "Just get the bullet out of there." "Please," Rayburn protested. "I don't want to die burning -- " "Remember what I can do." Rayburn remembered. He removed the lamp chimney and passed several knives through the flame. "No time to purify the instruments," he muttered. He picked up one of the scalpels after cleaning off the wound. The blade sparkled like a small star in the lamplight. Rayburn bent down, blade poised over the wound. Jordan saw sweat running down his neck, dampening his night shirt. "Be careful," Jordan said. "Very careful." he knew he could not expect anesthetics. There were none. Rayburn began to cut at the wound. Jordan's fingers were scarlet where they clutched the table. The knife dug. The color of the fingers changed from scarlet to livid white... Rayburn breathed with noisy gasps. He wiped away the blood with a rag and kept cutting. T he piece of lead clanked into the enameled tray. Rayburn sewed up the wound, bandaged it with clean cloth, and began picking up the bloody rags from the floor. "We'd better hurry," Spain advised. "It isn't safe to leave Jenny with the wagon for too long. How do you feel?" "Better," Jordan replied honestly, in spite of the pain. He bowed mockingly to Rayburn. "Thank you... doctor." The old man looked at him, swallowing hard. A question framed itself suddenly within his eyes. "Wait a moment. If you are -- one of them -- you should have been able to remove the wound yourself. I didn't think of that." Resentment for the mental suffering he had endured sprang to light on his face. "How powerful are you?" he whispered. "I'm a human being like yourself. The only difference is, I refuse to believe in lies." "Come on, Jordan," Spain said nervously. "Don't waste time -- " "But you wear the black question mark," Rayburn whispered. Dazed, not knowing whether to believe in Jordan as a demon or not, the old man stumbled forward, thrusting a scalpel ahead of him. "I'll see how strong you are -- " His eyes were open wide. Spain called a sharp warning. Rayburn swung the knife at Jordan, who fended with his good arm and pushed the old man backwards. The doctor .stumbled, arms flung out. He clutched at the desk. His fingers caught the lamp and pulled it over. The flames crept out like red tongues, licking over the bloody rags scattered on the floor. Jordan and Spain turned for the door as the flames began to dance over the wooden planking. They rushed through the house and out into the street. Doors were open now. Other men and women in night dress were watching in panic as yellow fire lit up the inside of the doctor's house like a magic lantern. "We must move fast," Spain said, as they ran toward the square. "The fire will bring many people -- " Hands clutched at them. Angry voices asked where they were going; who, what, why. Jordan pushed them away roughly and ran on. They dodged through back alleys and yards as a red smear stained the sky. Down one last alley, and they were running across the square. The wagon remained in its original position. Dim outlines showed where the dogs lay under the wheels. The horses were skittering nervously, as if recently disturbed. The two men reached the wagon. The dogs did not get up. Jordan knelt down in the darkness, reaching out with fearful hands. He touched the soft warm fur of one dog. He felt something else. Sickened, he examined the others. All three of the dogs had bullet holes in their heads. "Spain," he said urgently, but the older man was searching the interior of the wagon. "She's gone, Jordan," he whispered. "The dogs," Jordan, murmured, confused. "Jordan, Jenny's gone!" "That's right, pilgrims," said a voice from the shadows of the courthouse. "Lay down the pistol." Spain yanked back the gun hammer, but Jordan grabbed his wrist. "No! We've got to find out what happened." Weakly, Spain dropped the gun into the dirt. The men moved out from the shadows. "Where is she?" Spain said brokenly. "Locked up in a house," replied the leader, "until dawn." "How did you find out about me?" Jordan asked. Hope seemed a lost and lonely thing. The leader said, "We seen your arm, so I went and talked with somebody who came into town earlier hunting a feller with a bloody arm." Jordan realized that there were five men, instead of four. Even as he thought, the fifth stepped out to where the lamplight fell on the lower half of his body. One blackcoated arm hung loosely, pressing a wounded side. The other hand carried a pistol. Suddenly, he was on Jordan, clubbing at his head. Shotgun barrels lifted, silver-blue bars flashing in the night. Jordan fought back, but weakly -- There was dirt under him. Spain was struggling. The stars were tinted with a scarlet haze, and voices lifted in the distance. His hand flopped against furry hide that was growing cold. He saw one of Red Henry's boots coming for his face. He jerked his head aside, but not in time. Complete darkness smashed down on him and covered him over. into the air and caught it absently. He was standing at the window of the parlor. Out on the lawn, men were gathered, talking quietly, scratching their beards. Black soot and sparks still drifted in clouds across the rooftops from the wreckage of Rayburn's house. Jenny sat on the embroidered settee, watching Jordan who rested loosely in a large brown rocker that creaked ever so little as it swayed. Jordan's mind worked endlessly, thinking of Mount Gabriel where the other scientists would be gathering. Abruptly, Jenny got up. "I wish they'd tell us what they're going to do." Spain tossed the black bottle. "Red Henry told me. They're waiting for dawn. Then they're going to take us outside of town and kill usl It sounds a bit ridiculous, doesn't it?" His smile was artificial. He tossed the bottle once more and it fell back into his hand with a faint plop. "Why all of us?" Jordan massaged his arm, trying to rub away the pain. "I don't understand," Jenny said. "I do," Spain replied. "He means that he's the only one Red Henry really wants." "And he doesn't know you two have the black question mark, does he?" Jordan asked. "Don't," Jenny pleaded. "Please don't talk like that." "He didn't look for a mark on me," Spain continued, watching the brightening pearl sky. "You, Jenny?"  "No," she said angrily. "Please -- " "Well," he sighed, "it's almost dawn. The men are begining to move out there." They were hefting their guns restlessly, eyes on the house, awed, and eager to be finished with their job. "Be practical," Jordan went on, even though a great sickness fought and writhed inside his stomach. "I'm no scientist. I only carry the black mark. You're a chemist. You would be useful at Mount Gabriel, but I -- " He gestured simply with uplifted palms. "Stop it," Jenny cried, turning her back on both of them. "Stop it! We're together -- " "He's right, you know," Spain said softly. "In one way," Jenny said. Her voice was harsh. "Of course he's right in one way, but not -- " She stopped. "But how could we do it?" Spain asked, approaching Jordan. "I'm fool enough to want to live when someone offers me a chance." Jordan pointed at the black bottle. "That might blot out the question marks." Spain's eyes grew large and excited. He rubbed sweaty hands on his harlequin suit. "Let's try," he said eagerly. It was a childish giggle. Jordan nodded assent. Spain slipped the suit down oflf his aging shoulders. Behind one jutting shoulderblade was the mark. Jordan opened the bottle with trembling hands and slopped a little of the paint over the symbol. "Walk to the window and pull back the curtains," he ordered. Spain hurried to comply. The shimmering light of new dawn dripped over him. "It doesn't show," Jordan told him, almost with regret. Spain struggled to get back into his suit. "Jenny," he said anxiously. "Put some on her." Jordan moved closer, seeing the way her head shook, seeing her skinny body that might once have been womanly, and might be womanly again. He put a hand onher shoulder. "Jenny -- " "Don't touch me." He pressed her shoulder and felt the skin faintly warm. "It's the right thing." She pulled the blouse away and he daubed on the paint. Then she turned and looked at him, all of the hunger and longing and fear of the dark years reaching out to hold him for a moment. "Mount Gabriel will be lonely," she said, and walked to the window. Hastily, Jordan gave Spain the bottle of paint, and the older man deposited it again in his pocket. Jordan started to speak when boots sounded outside the door. They waited silently and the door opened slowly. Red Henry, great blue pistol in one hand, gazed at Jordan, seeing the finish of his mad hunt. The other two he dismissed with cursory glances. And Jordan knew they had a chance. "You wjint me to die, don't you?" he asked. Red Henry's mouth twitched. "Yes, I want you to die, although I can't do it slowly this time, with all the townsmen watching." "But did you know there's a price? There's a price for everything in the world, even for sorcerers." His long jaw raised quizzically, just a bit shaken. "What is the price?" "The lives of these two people." He balanced himself lightly on his feet, exactly as his approach had to be balanced. Henry laughed suddenly. "Why should I spare them, sorcerer? They took you in. They helped you." "Because you hate only sorcerers. The sorcerers caused the death of your family." He moved quickly to the window, caught a fistful of cloth and ripped the clown suit. He tore Jenny's blouse in the same fashion. "These people aren't sorcerers," he said quickly, not daring to look at their backs. and her father turned around so that their backs were no longer exposed. "They have no mark on them," Red Henry admitted, "but they helped you." "Either you let them go," Jordan said, readying his final desperate stroke, "or you don't get me. And above all, you want to see me die... by your hand." The black coated man peered at Jordan for weapons. He saw none. "I have a way to die by my own hand." Jordan jerked the doctor's bandages away and dug his fingers into the sewn edges of the wound, fighting the pain. "I can pull this open and bleed, but I know you want the death your way. Let them go, and I do nothing." The other man's fingers were stroking the gun butt nervously. "All right," he breathed. "I want you. They can go free." Jordan let out a long breath and relaxed, wishing he had some god to which he could offer thanks. "Outside," Red Henry ordered. "It's dawn." No one spoke as they walked out of the old house. The wagon was brought around. Red Henry, Jordan and the rest of the men mounted horses. The little cavalcade rode toward the east as the sky began to turn white as a shroud. The buildings dropped behind, one by one, and the hills began. They stopped at a large tree near the road. Jordan's arm was almost empty of aching. Red Henry and the other men dismounted. They came toward Jordan where he sat his horse. Henry reached into his saddlebag and brought out a long wooden stake, sharply pointed. He walked to the small circle of men around Jordan. He smiled. "Now, witch-man -- " The sun began to glint yellow over the hills. Jenny and her father watched from the wagon, their faces streaked and dirty. "I'm going to drive this right through your heart," Red Henry said softly. A morning wind made soft noises in the trees. Jenny screamed. Red Henry turned, angered. He peered at her for a moment, then dragged one of his pistols free and pointed it at her. Through the faint mist of pain still on him, Jordan saw her face, inscribed like a fiery image in his mind. He saw the gun. Savagely he kicked the horse, dragging its head back and up, tearing at the reins. The horse lifted its feet high in the air, making shrill noises of fear. The men cursed. Red Henry whirled, mouth open, swinging the gun at the head of the horse and at the sharp hooves that came down and smashed his skull. Red Henry's gun exploded in the out of his mouth. He jerked once or twice on the ground. Jordan hung onto the reins as the horse reared again, striking at the men. They scattered toward the trees, hunting their guns. The world began to darken around Jordan. He felt, somehow, from the warm flow on his body, that his wound had broken. And the guns were lifting, from the trees. Lifting at him. He kicked the horse again as it clattered past the wagon away from the grove. For seemingly endless hours he rode that way, lost in a half-world of grim fevered trees and dark sunlight. The horse swayed and bucked under him. He was losing his hold... And at last he let his arms relax completely. He was lifted upward for a moment, and then there was nothing under him, and then very suddenly, a hard something that was the earth. Hoofs rattled away into the distance. He lay in the middle of the road, in the sun, watching with strange curiosity the way the red blood from his wound mixed with the grainy brown dirt of the road. And then the sun, a dying candle in the sky, went out. The darkness that came after was only a partial dark and there was a face; Jenny bending over him, and the rocking, as if he were in a coffin that floated on a dark sea. His arm did not hurt so much. He was tired. Jenny kept saying words... Red Henry killed... they were disorganized... we followed you... found you in the road... Mount Gabriel... you..." The thoughts made sense now. Through the dark and the hurt, they made a pattern. Mount Gabriel. Mount Gabriel, to be built tall and strong above the fear and the hatred, for the morning that would inevitably come. And he would be there, with her. The rocking carried him on into the healing darkness from which he knew he would soon return. Money was worthless, yet no man dared go broke. It was all pretty confusing to Mark until "Point-Plus-Pearlie told him -- By Noel Loomis iously backward as he ran up the street to the place where the faded gold lettering on one window said "Jewelry." That would be a good place to hide, he thought. Most of the plate-glass windows and doors along the street were broken out as in fact they were everywhere, and had been for twenty years -- but one of the jewelry windows and the door, protected by iron grating, were still whole and would help to conceal him. With one final glance back at the comer, he climbed the grating, scuttled across it, and dropped down. Then, keeping low, he ducked in among the dusty old counters and stopped abruptly, listening. He heard Conley's slow, slapping footsteps as the tall man rounded the comer and came up the street. He forced himself to breathe softly in spite of the pounding of his heart. The dust rose a little around him and got in his nostrils and he wanted to sneeze, but by sheer willpower he choked it down. Conley was from the Machine -- # : Central Audit Bureau -- and the Machine knew by now that Mark was three thousand points in the red. Three thousand points -- when you were supposed to be always within one day's point of a balance. You were allowed twelve hundred points a day, so Mark was now two and a half days in debit. He'd been walking the streets in a sort of daze, signing slips right and left while his own pad of shps stayed in his pocket. He hadn't cared, either, until now, because in this brave new world of the one freedom -- freedom from work -- he was abominably unhappy. Everybody struggled all day to get enough points to stay even with Central, and what good did It do them? You got even one day, but the next day you had to start all over. There wasn't any point to it. So he'd said to hell with it, and for five days now he'd ignored the Machine entirely except to line up automatically once a day at the concourse to have his card audited. And for five straight days the balance had been in red. Then, today, he had seen Conley on the street, coming toward him. All of a sudden Mark had been scared. He didn't know what Central would do to him -- nobody knew -- but he didn't want to find out, either. He ran from Conley. Now he crouched in the dust behind an empty counter while Conley's footsteps approached. He held hb breath when they got close, and when they passed the broken window he was very thankful. It was late afternoon and he thought Conley would go back to Central. Nobody knew much about Conley except that he represented the Machine and that he seemed to disappear within it every afternoon. So, presently, Mark crawled out of the broken window and walked down to Main Street. He looked carefully right and left and then, not seeing Conley's tall form above the traffic, he wandered slowly down the street, trying to figure things out. Why wasn't there anything worth while to do? What was the reason for all the broken windows and empty stores? Had there once been places where people could buy things like food and clothes? Maybe -- before Central Audit Bureau had come into existence. Or had Central always been there? Mark saw the old lady sitting in the wheel-chair. He turned out absently to walk by her. He saw her put her foot in his way but his brain wasn't working. He stumbled over her foot. Instantly the old lady half arose from her chair as if in pain, shrieking and brandishing her cane, the leg held stiffiy out in front of her. "You've injured me," she shrieked in a raucous voice. "You've hurt my lame foot!" Mark stood there dumbly. He was a young man and so he didn't at once foresee what was about to happen. A crowd gathered in no time. The old lady was putting on a show. Mark didn't get it. He would have allowed her a thousand points -- even fifteen hundred -- without argument. But he got the shock of his young life. "Thirty thousand points!" she screamed at him, and thrust a pad of slips at him. "Sign my slip, please." M ark took the pad automatically. He took the pencil she held out. He started to sign. He'd never get a credit balance at the Central Bureau now, but he didn't care. Maybe he'd get in so deep they'd give him some work. The old lady's voice rose unexpectedly. "My feelings are hurt, too. He did it deliberately. Five thousand points for my injured feelings." Dazedly Mark wrote down "Thirty-five thousand and no more," and signed his name. He handed the pad back to her and started on. The crowd was leaving. But a voice stopped him. A soft voice. "Wait, son." He looked back. He started to go on, then he saw the old lady's eyes on his. "Stick around," she said. There wasn't any raucousness in her voice now. "Wait till the crowd goes. I want to talk to you." Presently he was walking beside her while she laboriously operated the two big hand-wheels that propelled the chair. Two blocks away she turned into an empty building marked "Groceries." Mark helped her cross the threshold. Inside, she amazed him by springing out of the chair and standing quite steadily. She was small and she wasn't as old and wrinkled as he had thought. "You get in the chair," she said. "I'll push you. I need the exercise." A minute later she was pushing him briskly along the street while Mark sat, still half dazed, in the wicker chair, her old red shawl was across his lap. "Get cramps in my legs, to say nothing of my bottom," she observed, "sitting there all day." She saw him stiffen. "Oh, you needn't be shocked. After all. I'm old enough to be your grandmother. I was bom in #, you know." "Nineteen-forty," Mark repeated, wonderingly. "Gee, that was baOk in the days when everybody worked. I wish I could work." "Well, it's a changed world," she observed. "In those days, you had to work." At that instant Mark heard the ominous slapping footsteps. He looked ahead, and there was Conley, easily noticeable because of the type N hat a head above everybody else, coming toward them. Mark snatched up the red shawl and wrapped it around his face to the nose and pulled his hat low over his eyes. He watched from under the type L brim while Conley approached. He held his breath while Conley fixed his deep eyes on him for a moment, but Conley went by, and once more he was safe. The old lady trotted briskly along. They passed a few people who stared at them, but Mark was thinking. "This is #," he observed. "You're eighty-one years old. You must know all about things." "I'm quite spry," she pointed out, "though I must say I am working up a sweat right now. No, no -- " She pushed Mark back into the chair. "It's good for me. Don't get enough exercise any more. Now you just sit there. You're in a bad way. Anybody who'd fall for such a phony act and release thirty-five thousand points without even an argument -- well, of course," she said archly, "I do have a wellturned ankle." But the enormity of Mark's debit with Central when the old lady should turn in his slip, began to worry him. He wondered if he could get it back from her. He wasn't happy with the world, and things were all wrong, and all that, but still -- well, he did have to live in it. Thirty-five thousand points. He began to worry. He wished he knew what the penalty would be. He wondered if the old lady knew. What were these points all about anyway? "You must know," he said, "how the world got into this mess." She chuckled, "For thirty-five thousand points, I guess you've got a right to the story." She turned into the archway of a standard type B apartment house. He wondered what she would do with all those points. What did anybody do with them? Everybody had about the same living quarters. Food was furnished by automatic venders at the Hydroponic Farms. Clothes were provided, readymade; all you had to do was put your credit card in a machine, punch the buttons for your measurements, and a suit would drop down the chute. Mark got out of the chair and helped her inside with it. He took off his hat and started uncertainly to leave, but she put her hand on his arm, "No, no. Have supper with me. I'll tell you all about everything. Glad to. There aren't many who want to know about things any more." Her apartment was neat and clean. It was hard for Mark to connect it with an old woman shrieking points at him. "My name's Pearl. Point-Plus-Pearlie, they call me. But my real name's Penelope. You can call me Penelope." "Thank you," Mark said gravely, and sat down. Penelope bustled intoan apron and began pulling packages from the. freezer. "We'll have a feed, you and I -- a real feed." She chuckled pleasantly. "After all, you're paying for it." M ark squirmed uncomfortably. "I'll tell you how all this started," Penelope said, popping open a can of high-content protein. "Back before you were bom there were insurance companies. At first they were started to insure your life, and -- " "Your life!" Mark frowned. "How -- " "Never mind. Also, they insured you against loss by fire. Then it was loss by collision of vehicles -- you've never seen an auto, of course -- and so on. Finally they got to insuring you against hurting yourself when you slipped on a cake of soap in the bathtub, and then they insured against a suit for damages by someone who might stub his toe and fall down and break a leg on your sidewalk. Follow me?" "I think so," said Mark doubtfully. "Well, there were all kinds of lawsuits. Two men would be in an accident. Both hurt. Their insurance companies would sue each other. Suppose A knocked over a ladder and B fell down on top of him. B's fall broke A's arm and it broke his own leg. A could sue B for breaking his arm. B could sue A for making him fall. Well, suppose A was insured by company X, and B was insured by company Y. A and B filed claims against each other's companies, and everybody went to court." "You mean they didn't agree on damages?" Mark asked incredulously. "Exactly." Penelope cut off the top of a bottle of enzymes. "It was pretty dumb. But pretty soon the companies got wise. They formed worlung agreements. "When two companies carried insurance on two persons involved in an accident, the companies just presented their claims to each other, and the one with the biggest claim against him paid the difference, while each company paid off the claim of the one it represented. You can see what eventually happened." She punched a button and a dinette table popped out of the wall. "Companies insured people for more and more types of damage, even against being insulted or against a claim for damages for being insulted. The big companies eliminated the small ones, and it was just a matter of bookkeeping among those that were left. Eventually the government took it over." "But look," said Mark, "I don't see -- " "Don't rush me." Penelope put a can into the container-dissolver and punched the button that set out the plates and silverware on the tiny table. "You see, pretty soon everybody was insured for everything possible. People were collecting right and left, mostly small amounts but lots of them. But it took quite a bit of time to file claims and so on. And also, a man spent all he made buying insurance to protect himself. It was a wicked circle. Nobody could quit buying insurance and nobody dared quit filing claims. That's when the government took over. They simplified things. Once a day you turn your slips into Central and the Machine audits your account. That's all there is to it." "But there's nothing else to do," Mark objected. "No entertainment, no work." "Why should there be entertainment? Entertainment means work for somebody. No, Central -- which is the government, of course -- has eliminated work for everybody and at the same time has provided something to keep everybody busy. What w'ork must be done is done by automatic, self-lubricating, self-repairing, self-renewing machinery." She sighed. "It's a brave new world. Everything is neatly worked out. Everybody spends all their time gathering points to offset the points they lose gathering points -- and nobody seems to mind except a few rebels like you and me. I saw that rebellious look in your eyes when you signed my slip. That's why I invited you to come along with me. But, as I said, Central keeps everybody busy all day and half the night trying to balance themselves. There's no labor problem, no unemployment, no relief, no worry about anything." She paused, to dip the vitamins out of the dissolver. "The only catch is -- it's so damned monotonous." Mark blinked, but Penelope whirled on him, the dissolver in one hand. "Why do you think I sit out there and put on my act all day long? Not to get points, though I confess the points are the measure of my success -- but because life is too dull otherwise." She dished out the vitamins. "You say the government did all this?" "Yes." A thought struck Mark. "Who is the government?" the ice-water faucet. She turned her head and stared at him like a bright-eyed bird. "To tell you the truth, Mark, as far as I know the men who used to make up the government disappeared after the last war, about the time all this automatic machinery was put in. We used to have an election every so often, but I haven't heard that word for twenty-five years. Do you know what I think?" "No," Mark said attentively, "I don't think there is any more government!" Penelope said dramatically. "I think all that's left are the Machine and Central Audit Bureau -- which is nothing but a giant posting machine." "Have you seen It -- Central, I mean? I see the concourse where we line up every day to have our cards posted -- but what's behind those twelve hundred windows?" it from one of the last planes. Central covers miles and niiles in both directions. They said then it was the biggest machine on earth -- and do you know, Mark" -- she paused dramatically -- "I think the Machine is the government! Roll up your chair, Mark." Mark did. "But doesn't there have to be somebody to take care of the Machine?" he asked, holding her chair. "Not that I know of. They said it was perfect -- that barring an earthquake it would run for a thousand years without a human hand." The iron-juice cocktail was pretty good, the way Penelope had flavored it with enzymes. But Mark inevitably got back to the thing that worried him. "What will happen when that release slip of mine goes through for thirty-five thousand points?" Penelope raised her white eyebrows. "I don't know, but undoubtedly something drastic. I'll tell you what. I'll hold your slip for a while and you go out and see if you can get some points on your credit side. Stir up a little trouble. Get the points first and argue after."... Mark went out and tried to get some points next day, but he couldn't seem to get his heart in his work. It was all so pointless. Why couldn't the old lady give him back that slip, anyway? Mark got pretty much in the dumps, and after he managed to get his foot stepped on and demanded three hundred points, only to be countered by a claim of four hundred for hurting the other man's instep, he began to feel very low indeed. At the end of the week he was walking slowly along the street watching for Conley, because he was getting further in the red every day, when he saw a foot stuck out in his way and heard a voice say, "Don't you stumble over my lame foot," and he looked up and saw the old lady. Her black eyes were soft. "You don't look happy, Mark." "No." He held out his card. "Hm." Her keen old eyes shot back to his. "Thirty-two hundred in the red. That's more than before. You've lost two hundred points this week, Mark." "I know," he said dully. "Here. Push me, Mark." She pulled the shawl around her and Mark started pushing the wheelchair. "You're a nice boy," she said when they reached a quiet street. "You just can't adjust yourself to this modern world." "I want a job," Mark said stubbornly. "Something to do besides -- well, some kind of mark to aim at, I guess. This point business is just putting in time. I'm not creating anything. Even if I could fasten zippen on feather-beds, I'd be doing something worth while, because it'd be used. But this way of living is like digging a hole and then filling it in again. Why, you don't even dare to get into a fight. Somebody would collect a thousand points every time you hit him. The standard price of a black eye is three thousand. You have to be pretty careful about things like that. And there's always Conley." "Well," Penelope said, "I'm going to make you a proposition. I'll hold up your slip for sixty days, and in the meantime I'll teach you how to get ahead of the game. I'll teach you the tricks of the trade, just as old Point-a-Minute Charlie taught me. They say he averaged a point a minute all his life." "Where is he now?" asked Mark, interested. The old lady pondered. "Come to think of it, I don't know. I remember the last time I talked to him his credit balance was #." She frowned at the tremendous, low-lying dome that covered the horizon in the distance and marked Central Audit Bureau. "I haven't seen him since then." "Hm," said Mark. "Well, now," Penelope said briskly. "I'll make you a regular business deal. I'll teach you, and for all you get, you give me twenty per cent. See how many you can get. Try for ten thousand. That'll give you something to shoot at." "Maybe I can beat the Machine," Mark said eagerly. Penelope swallowed. "They say you can't beat the Machine. But I guess it won't hurt to try." Mark did well. At first he just walked down the street stopping people as fast as he could get to them. "You didn't recognize me. sir," he would say indignantly. "I met you at Central concourse two years ago. Remember? You stood right in front of me in line for three hours, and we talked about our new suits. Remember? My feelings are injured because you ignored me just now. Fifty points. Will you sign my slip, please?" His credit reached the black the first week. He was netting five hundred points a day, and it was fun, but Penelope said, "We'll go for bigger stakes. This is kindergarten stuff. Now here's the way you start... managed to get himself knocked down four times, and each time he came up with a skinned knee and collected from five hundred to eight hundred and fifty points. He was learning, Penelope assured him when he gleefully showed her his card at the end of the day. Mark was elated. That day he had gathered fifty-one hundred points. "But this can get monotonous, too," Penelope said. "Anyway, you can't go around forever with a sandpapered knee. You're learning fast, and you're learning right. Old Point-a-Minute Charlie was the best there was, in his day, and he always said you make more praints guessing character than you do falling down. Know your victim before you have an accident, and then hit him for all he will pay and hit him quick -- the way I did you." She chuckled. "My commission for today is one thousand and twenty points. Here, sign my slip, please." Mark signed. It was a cheap price to pay for the fact that life was no longer pointless. He decided he'd try to gather a credit of one hundred thousand points. He worked on bigger stuff. He didn't try just everybody. He picked his signers with care. He slept until nine every morning and he and Penelope played two-handed bridge at a tenth of a point a point until midnight. He felt sorry for the poor suckers who had to get out at sunup and tread the sidewalks until dark to get enough points to satisfy Central. They were working like slaves, while he was living the life of Point-a-Minute Charlie. It was a lovely existence. He forgot about Penelope's slip for thirtyfive thousand. He could almost pay it off anyway. Then came the day when he pulled his grand coup. He spent a week planning it, with Penelope's shrewd advice. He remembered what she had said about the man on the ladder in the nineteen-forties. He sandpapered his back and painted an irregular spot with merthiolate and iodine, and practiced twisting his back until it looked out of shape. Then he went out and watched for an absent-minded, nervous, excitablelooking man to try his next effort on. Penelope's biggest advice was, "Preparation is half the points," so it was three days before Mark found the right person. After he found him it was very simple. He signaled Penelope to follow, and then he walked behind the man until they came to a high curb. Mark moved out to the left. The man started to step up on the curb. Mark darted across in front of the man just as the man raised his foot. Mark managed to stumble exactly in front of the man. His arms went out and one hand caught the little man's leg. The little man fell squarely on top of him, assisted by a slight push from Penelope. Mark groaned heart-breakingly. In a moment there was a crowd. The little man was getting up, bewildered, and automatically trying to dust off his type K suit. Mark lay half on the curb, half off, squirming like a broken-back snake. "My back," he moaned piteously. "Oh, my back." The little man seemed paralyzed at the enormity of the thing he had done. He stared at Mark and Mark squirmed harder and moaned louder. Then Penelope hobbled up and pulled Mark's shirttail out of his trousers. The iodine spot on his back looked yellow and purple, and there were gasps from the crowd. "He did it!" Mark said, glaring accusingly at the little man. "He tripped me. He tripped me and broke my back!" Penelope was putting on a good act too, crying and wringing her hands and moaning. "My poor boy!" she said, over and over. A woman in the crowd came up and made a very expressive raspberry in the little man's face. The little man was not only bewildered; he was frightened. Mark adjudged the time had come. "Points for my broken back!" he cried. Penelope held out a slip to the little man. He signed it dazedly. then he slipped out of the crowd, while three men picked up Mark and laid him tenderly in Penelope's reclining wheel-chair. Mark could hardly contain himself. As soon as they were safely out of sight he said excitedly, "Let me see the slip." Penelope looked around. She kept pushing him but she handed over the slip. "Fifty thousand points!" Mark read under his breath. "Isn't that wonderful!" He couldn't remember ever having felt so elated in his life. Penelope was shaking her head wonderingly. "That was a good act," she said. "I'd never have had the nerve to try that myself." "Oh, that's nothing." Mark was enthusiastic. "As soon as I get fitted up with a magnelite brace so it'll look good, I'm going to knock a piece out of that curbing, and then if I can find out who's the registered owner of it I'll hit him for twenty-five thousand." M ark got the twenty-five thousand. The owner of the sidewalk was finally convinced that Mark's broken back was worth a lot. From then on there was no holding Mark. Pretending to act for the little man who had originally knocked him down, he located the woman who had made a raspberry in the little man's face and collected another two thousand; the woman didn't recognize Mark, because Mark's features were changed a little. Then Mark spotted two others who had made threatening noises and collected five hundred from each, and from another who expressed doubt that he was really hurt, Mark got a thousand points. There was nothing to it, really. Most people had regular beats, and all Mark had to do was sit at one side in Penelope's wheel-chair and wait for them to come by. He would have collected more if he could have remembered more faces. He saw Conley go by once a day but now he wasn't afraid. He thought Conley looked at him disappointedly. A couple of weeks later he got his card back from the Machine at Central and looked at it with great satisfaction. He had a himdred and thirteen thousand points to his credit. He met Penelope and they went to her apartment for dinner. Jubilantly Mark got all the fancy food -- even some synthetic meat -- that he could get on his card, and they prepared for a feast. "The only thing is," Penelope said as she punched the dishes on the table, "I'm scared. I have a feeling you shouldn't have gone over a hundred thousand." "Is that why you never cashed my slip for thirty-five thousand?" She nodded. "That's mostly the reason. My balance is over eighty thousand and I was afraid." "Afraid of what?" "I don't know. Just afraid." "Well," said Mark, "I'm not. I don't see what Central can do to a person for getting points. There's no rule against it." "It's dangerous," Penelope insisted. "Nevertheless, I have made a decision. A hundred thousand points -- that's nothing." His head was points!" Penelope gasped. "Mark, you mustn't do anything like that. Yon "No," Mark said complacently, "but it's a lot of fun getting them. And it gives me something worth while to do. We'll sit up till three o'clock every morning and play bridge, and I'll stay in bed till noon, and dream up new stunts. I'll pull one a week. Life is going to be worth living." The announcing light showed at the door. Penelope pressed the admittance button. A tall, thin man came in a moment later. "Mark Renner?" he asked. Mark jumped. "Conley!" Mark's stomach had a funny feeling in it. "They told me I would find you here," Conley said. Penelope had recovered enough to gasp. "What do you want?" "I'm from Central Audit Bureau." "That's just lovely," Penelope said, "but it doesn't mean anything to us but a place where we get our cards balanced." "It should mean something to you," Conley said hollowly. "Central is the government." Penelope stared at him. "Sit down, please. I thought Central was just a machine." "It is something more than a machine. There is a small corps of persons who live inside the machine to service it and occasionally adjust it, and those persons really are the government -- that is, all the government we have." He sat down stiffly, his back straight. "Now then, Mr. Renner, your card today showed a credit balance of a hundred and thirteen thousand points. Is that correct?" Mark swallowed. "Yes." He looked at Penelope. She was pale. With difficulty Mark asked, "Is it your job to cheek up on people, to see if they are entitled to their points?" "Oh, my, no. Central doesn't care about that. In fact. Central doesn't care how much anybody's debit is. We figure as long as a man is in debt he'll try to pay it off. They always do, at least. No, we never bother with debits, and I don't suppose we ever would." Mark breathed a sigh of relief. "But a credit of over a hundred thousand is something else," said Conley. "The machines won't handle six figures without trouble, you see, so there has to be a penalty," He looked very sad. "Now, then, I shall have to -- " "Wait!" cried Penelope. "His credit is a himdred and thirteen thousand -- but I have his slip for thirty-five thousand. If I turn it in, that would fix it up for him, wouldn't it." Mark felt a warm wave of gratitude toward Penelope. She was a it. "Well -- yes, I suppose so. We don't like these last-minute adjustments, but I suppose -- " thrust it into Conley's face. "There!" she said triumphantly. "Put that on my account." Conley looked a little sad. "This is your slip?" he asked Mark. Mark nodded gratefully. "Let me have your credit card. Miss Penelope. Now, then. I'll transfer these points -- hm." Conley's eyebrows raised. "Do you know what your balance is now. Miss Penelope?" Penelope's mouth shot open and she popped her hand across it. "You have now a hundred and twenty-two thousand," Conley said. He got up from his chair. "Well, I'm sorry, folks. That's the way it is." Mark gulped. "What way?" "Miss Penelope will have to come with me." Mark was on his feet. "If she goes, I go," he said dramatically. Conley looked at him. "If you feel that way about it, there won't be any trouble at all. You did go over, so I can take you in too." "In where?" Penelope demanded. "A certain number of persons is required to keep Central going, as I said -- actually to be the government. But most of the population today is so apathetic they wouldn't be of any use at all, so years ago some of us who were in Central got an idea. We discovered that whenever any citizen rebels against the monotony of life today, he or she eventually winds up trying to gather a lot of points, because that is the only outlet for energy and ambition. That is the kind of person we need, so when anybody gets over a hundred thousand, the machine warns us. We go after them." Conley picked up his type N hat. "Well, see you in the morning. Punch in your cards at window #. We'll do the rest. And by the way -- " He was at the door. "We start work at eight o'clock." Mark brightened. "Did you say work?" "Oh, it's only four hours a day, five days a week. The rest of the time is your own, only of course you can't come Outside. It would upset things if the general public learned about us. Yes, it's a regular job; not hard work, but steady work. Gives you something to aim for; there are promotions, you know, and extra bonuses for those who show promise." "Work!" Mark said. "Steady work? You mean there'll be something to do all the time?" "Five days a week," said Conley. Mark said, "This is so sudden. Why don't you sit down a minute while we let it soak in? We have plenty of enzymes and stuff for a guest, don't we. Miss Penelope? Why not stay for supper, Conley?" "No, thanks," said Conley. "We have beefsteak and hot biscuits for supper in Central." Penelope shrieked with joy. "Beef!" Mark was puzzled. "What's that?" "It's an old-fashioned food," said Conley. "Rather tasty top." "Please sit down," Penelope begged, "and tell us more." Conley looked at his watch. "Believe I will. My feet get a little tired all day from pounding the pavement. But there isn't much more to tell. You'll find out everything tomorrow. And I'm sure you'll like it. We try to give each person work to challenge him." "What if a person wouldn't want to go to Central?" "Very few ever object. Once in a while they are afraid and run away, but we just register their number with all the machines, and whenever that number is presented for food or clothes, the machines reject the card." He paused. "A very neat arrangement. Of course, inside of Central the point system as you know it now will be of no value whatever. We use money in Central." Penelope had a can of synthetic meat in her hands. "Beef!" she said suddenly, and hurled the can into the disintichute. "I'm going to starve all night so I can enjoy eating tomorrow." "So nobody ever gets away?" asked Mark. "Very seldom, though there's one fellow playing a game with Central. He must have gotten wind of us, and he keeps careful check on his points. About once every three months he starts going strong. He'll be putting in eight or ten thousand points a day. Then his balance will shoot up over a hundred thousand and I'll go after him, but he's always just signed away a lot of points. Would you believe it, the last time he had given away fifty thousand points to a fellow who claimed a broken back. He said he knew it was a phony, but he had me there and he laughed at me, for he had signed away the points. The slip showed up next day." Mark looked at Penelope and grinned. "We should have known that nobody in his right mind would give away fifty thousand points." Conley raised his hand in a salute. "See you tomorrow at Central. If they don't keep you busy, look me up." Mark watched him leave. Then he looked beamingly at Penelope. "Work! Every day! Eight o'clock! We'll have to get up before breakfast! Isn't it wonderful?" But Penelope's bird-like eyes were bright. "He said there would be promotions and bonuses for those who show promise," she recalled. "I wish we had known that. We could have made a cleanup and gone into Central with a record that would make their eyes pop out. Anyhow" -- sh dug her pad of release blanks out of her pocket and began to figure on the back. "Let's see, fifty thousand from the little man who's playing a game with Central, twenty-five from the owner of the sidewalk, two thousand for the raspberry, five hundred each from two who made noises of disrespect, and a thousand from the man who doubted that yoim back was really broken. You could have collected two thousand from that last one," she said absently, "if you hadn't got cold feet. Anyway, that's seventy-nine thousand points. Now, then, twenty per cent of that is fifteen thousand, eight hundred points." She wrote rapidly and held out the pad to Mark. "Sign my slip, please." Coming in the January Issue! Oheck and Checkmate startling situation in which lowly subterfuge is mightier than the atom -- and we of the western world arc the stooges!... Also in this issue are such outstanding science fiction adventures other exciting stories and features. No matter what the future, one factor must always be reckoned with -- the ingenuity of the human animal. Let There Be Light By Horace B. Fyfe T he two men attacked the thick tree trunk with a weary savagery. In the bright sunlight, glistening spatters of sweat flew from them as the old axes bit alternately into the wood. Blackie stood nearby, on the gravel shoulder of the highway, rubbing his short beard as he considered the depth of the white notch. Turning his broad, tanned face to glance along the patched and cracked concrete to where squat Vito kept watch, he caught the latter's eye and beckoned. "Okay, Sid -- Mike. We'll take it a while." The rhythm of the axe-strokes ceased. Red Mike swept the back of a forearm across the semi-shaven stubble that set him as something of a dandy. Wordlessly, big Sid ambled up the road to replace Vito. "Pretty soon, now," boasted Mike, eyeing the cut with satisfaction. "Think it'll bring them?" "Sure," replied Blackie, spitting on his hands and lifting one of the worn tools. "That's what they're for." "Funny," mused Mike, "how some keep going an' others bust. These musta been workin' since I was a little kid -- since before the last bhtz." "Aw, they don't hafta do much. 'Cept in winter when they come out to clear snow, all they do is put in a patch now an' then." Mike stared moodily at the weathered surface of the highway and edged back to avoid the reflected heat. "It beats me how they know a spot has cracked." "I guess there's machines to run the machines," sighed Blackie. "I dunno ; I was too young. Okay, Vito?" The relieving pair fell to. Mike stepped out of range of the flying chips to sit at the edge of the soft grass which was attempting another invasion of the gravel shoulder. Propelled by the strength of Vito's powerful torso, a single chip spun through the air to his feet. He picked it up and held it to his nose. It had a good, clean smell. When at length the tree crashed down across the road, Blackie led them to the ambush he had chosen that morning. It was fifty yards up the road toward the ruined city -- off to the side where a clump of trees and bushes provided shade and concealment. "Wish we brought something to eat." Vito said. "Didn't know it would take so long to creep up on 'em this morning," said Blackie. "The women'll have somethin' when we get back." "They better," said Mike. He measured a slender branch with his eye. After a moment, he pulled out a hunting knife, worn thin by years of sharpening, and cut off a straight section of the branch. He began whittling. "You damn' fool!" Sid objected. "You want the busted spot on the tree to show?" "Aw, they ain't got the brains to notice." "The hell they ain't! It stands out like one o' them old street signs. D'ya think they can tell, Blackie?" "I dunno. Maybe." Blackie rose cautiously to peer over a bed of blackberry bushes. "Guess I'll skin up a tree an' see if anything's in sight." He hitched up his pants, looking for an easy place to climb. His blue denims had been stoutly made, but weakened by many rips and patches, and he did not want to rip them on a snag. It was becoming difficult to find good, unrotted clothing in the old ruins. over his head, he sprang for it, pulled, kicked against the trunk, and flowed up into the foliage with no apparent effort. The others waited below. Sid glanced up occasionally, Vito idly kicked at one of the clubs made from an old two-byfour. The other lay beneath the piled jackets; but enough of the end protruded to show that they had been chopped from the same timber, gray-painted on one side, stained and gouged on the other where boards had once been nailed. A coU of rope lay beside the axes. High in the upper branches, Blackie braced himself with negligent confidence and stared along the concrete ribbon. From here, he thought, you'd almost think the place was still alive. instead of crumbling around our ears. The windows of the distant houses were dark, unglassed holes, but the sunlight made the masonry clean and shining. To Blackie, the ragged tops of most of the buildings were as natural as the tattered look of the few people he knew. Beyond, toward the center of the city, was real evidence of his race's bygone might -- a vast jumble of shattered stone and fused metal. Queer weeds and mosses infected the area, but it would be centuries before they could mask the desolation. Better covered, were the heaps along the road, seemingly shoved just beyond the gravel shoulders -- mouldering mounds which legend said were once machines to ride in along the pavement. Something glinted at the bend of the highway. Blackie peered closer. He swarmed down the tree from branch to branch, so lithely that the trio below hardly had the warning of the vibrating leaves before he dropped, cat-footed, among them. "They're cornin'!" He shrugged quickly into his stained jacket, emulated in silent haste by the others. Vito rubbed his hands down the hairy chest left revealed by his open jacket and hefted one of the clubs. In his broad paws, it seemed light. They were quiet, watching Sid peer out through narrowly parted brush of the undergrowth. Blackie fidgeted behind him. Finally, he reached out as if to pull the other aside, but at that moment Sid released the bushes and crouched. The others, catching his warning glance, fell prone, peen'ng through shrubbery and around tree trunks with savage eyes. The distant squawk of a jay became suddenly very dear, as did the sighing of a faint bi rc.e through the leaves overhead. Then a new, clanking, humming sound intruded. A procession of three vehicles rolled along the highway at an unvarying pace which took no account of patches or worn spots. They jounced in turn across a patch laid over a previous, unsuccessful patch, and halted before the felled tree. Two were bulldozers; the third was a light truck with compartments for tools. No human figures were visible. A moment later, the working force appeared -- a column of eight robots. These deployed as they reached the obstacle, and explored like colossal ants along its lenh. "What're they after?" asked Mike, whispering although he lay fifty yards away. "They're lookin' over the job for whatever sends them out," Blackie whispered back. "See those little lights stickin' out the tops o' their heads? I heard tell, once, that's how they're run." Some of the robots took saws from the truck and began to cut through the tree trunk. Others produced cables and huge hooks to attach the obstacle to the bulldozers. "Look at 'em go!" sighed Sid, hunching his stiff shoulders jealously. "Took us hours, an' they're half done already." They watched as the robots precisely severed the part of the tree that blocked the highway, going not one inch beyond the gravel shoulder, and helped the bulldozers to tug it aside. On the opposite side of the concrete, the shoulder tapered off into a six-foot drop. The log was jockeyed around parallel to this ditch and rolled into it, amid a thrashing of branches and a spurting of small pebbles. "Glad we're on the high side," whispered Mike. "That thing 'ud squash a guy's guts right out!" "Keep listenin' to me," Blackie said, "an' you'll keep on bein' in the right place at the right time." Mike raised his eyebrows at Vito, who thrust out his lower lip and nodded sagely. Sid grinned, but no one contradicted the boast. "They're linin' up," Blackie warned tensely. "You guys ready? Where's that rope?" Someone thrust it into his hands. Still squinting at the scene on the highway, he fumbled for the ends and held one out to Mike. The others gripped their clubs. "Now, remember!" ordered Blackie. "Me an' Mike will trip up the last one in line. You two get in there quick an' wallop him over the head -- but good!" "Don't go away while we're doin' it," said big Sid. "They won't chase ya, but they look out fer themselves. I don't wanna get tossed twenty feet again!" The eyes of the others flicked toward the jagged white scar running down behind Sid's right ear and under the collar of his jacket. Then they swung back to the road. "Good!" breathed Blackie. "The rollin' stuff's goin' first." The truck and bulldozers set out toward the city, with the column of robots marching a fair distance behind. The latter approached the ambush -- drew abreast -- began to pass. Blackie raised himself to a crouch with just the tips of his fingers steadying him. he surged out of the brush, joined to Red Mike by their grips on the twenty feet of rope. They ran up behind the marching machine, trailed by the others. In his right hand, Blackie twirled the part of the rope hanging between him and Mike. On the second swing, he got it over the head of the robot. He saw Mike brace himself. The robot staggered. It pivoted clumsily to its left, groping vaguely for the hindrance. Mike and Blackie tugged again, and the machine wound up facing them in its efforts to maintain balance. Its companions marched steadily along the road. "Switch ends!" barked Blackie. Alert, Mike tossed him the other end of the rope and caught Blackie's. They ran past the robot on either side, looping it in. Blackie kept going until he was above the ditch. He wound a turn of rope about his forearm and plunged down the bank. A shower of gravel spattered after him as Mike jammed his heels into the shoulder of the highway to anchor the other end. Then he heard the booming sound of the robot's fall. Blackie clawed his way up the bank. Vito and Sid were smashing furiously at the floundering machine. Mike danced about the melee with bared teeth, charging in once as if to leap upon the quarry with both feet. Frustrated by the peril of the whirling two-byfours,he swept up handfuls of gravel to hurl. Blackie turned to run for one of the axes. Just then, Sid struck home to the head of the robot. Sparks spat out amid a tinkle of glass. The machine ceased all motion. "All right!" panted Blackie. "All right! That's enough!" They stepped back, snarls fading. A handful of gravel trickled through Mike's fingers and pattered loudly on the concrete. Gradually, the men began to straighten up, seeing the robot as an inert heap of metal rather than as a weird beast in its death throes. "We better load up an' get," said Blackie. "We wanna be over on the trail if they send somethin' up the road to look for this" Vito dragged the robot off the highway by the head, and they began the ta of lashing it to the twoby-fours. It was about two hours later when they plodded around a street corner among the ruins and stopped before a fairly intact building. By that time, they had picked up an escort of dirty, half-clad children who ran ahead to spread the news. Two other men and a handful of women gathered around with eager exclamations. The hunters dropped their catch. "Better get to work on him," said Blackie, glancing at the sky. "Be dark soon." The men who had remained as guards ran inside the entrance of polished granite and brought out tools : hammers, crowbars, hatchets. Behind them hurried women with basins and large cans. The original four, weary from the weight of the robot despite frequent pauses on the trail, stepped back. "Where first, Blackie?" asked one of the men, waiting for the women to untangle the rope and timbers. "Try all the joints. After that, we'll crack him open down the middle for the main supply tank." He watched the metal give way under the blows. As the robot was dismembered, the fluid that had lubricated the complex mechanism flowed from its wounds and was poured by the women into a fivegallon can. "Bring a cupful, Judy," Blackie told his woman, a wiry blond girl. "I wanna see if it's as good as the last." He lit a stick at the fire as they crossed the littered, once-ornate lobby, and she followed him down a dim hall. He pulled aside the skins that covered their doorway, then stumbled his way to the table. The window was still uncovered against the night chill, but it looked out on a courtyard shadowed by towering walls. To eyes adjusted to the sunny street, the room was dark. Judy poured the oil into the makeshift lamp, waited for the rag ( Continued on page #) With no one to help him, it seemed the General was lost. But the enemy was soon to discover that -- By M. C. Pease D id it go well?" the aide asked. The admiral, affectionately known as the Old Man, did not reply until he'd closed the door, crossed the room, and dropped into the chair at his desk. Then he said: "Go well? It did not go at all. Every blasted one of them, from the President on down, can think of nothing but the way the Combine over-ran Venus. When I mention P-boats, they shout that the Venusians depended on P-boats, too, and got smashed by the Combine's dreadnoughts in one battle. 'You can't argue with it, man,' they tell me. And they won't listen." "But the Venusians fought their P-ships idiotically," the aide complained. "It was just plain silly to let small, light, fast ships slug it out with dreadnoughts. If they had used Plan K -- " The Old Man snorted. "Are you trying to convince me? I've staked my whole reputation on Plan K. They wouldn't give me the money to build a balanced spacefleet, even when the fleets of the Combine of Jupiterian Satellite States were staring them in the face. So, I took what I could get and poured it into P-boats. I threw all our engineering and scientific staff into making them faster and more maneuverable than anyone ever thought a space-ship could be. I got them to build me electronic computers that could direct that speed. And, two years ago, every cent I could lay my hands on went to install the computers on all our ships." "I remember," the aide said. "But, now the chips are down, the people have funked out on me. I am one of the most hated men in the Federation. They say I destroyed their Navy. And, we are not going to get a chance to try Plan K. They decided, today, to accept the Combine's offer to send envoys in a month to discuss possible revision of the Treaty of Porran. When I left, they were wondering if there was any chance of getting out for less than Base Q." "But, good lord, sir, Base Q supplies nine tenths of all our power. The Combine will have a strangle hold on us, if they get that." "Quite. But the people will give it to them, rather than fight. And the President will sign." "Surely, sir, the people are not all cowards?" "No. If they had time to think, they would fight. That's why the Combine is striking now. The people are panicky. Hysterical. The collapse of Venus was so sudden, and the disaster to their P-boats so complete. They've just lost hope. Most people would rather live under a dictator than die to no purpose. They've just lost hope." The pounding of the Old Man's fist measured his words and the depth of his anger. 'Tf we could only make them hope. Somehow. Anyhow." Suddenly, his clenched fist stopped in mid-air. He frowned. Slowly, his hand opened. The frown relaxed and a smile replaced it. "Maybe we can, at that. Maybe we can." He leaned back with his eyes half closed. His aide knew better than to interrupt him. Ten minutes later, he opened his eyes. "Make arrangements to have Commander Morgan take command of Base Q as soon as possible. Within two days at the outside." His manner was curt and clipped. "And bring him here to me before he leaves." "Yes, sir. But may I say, sir, I do not understand?" "You're not supposed to." "Yes, sir." The aide was a competent man. Orders were written that afternoon, in complete disregard of normal red-tape. Base Q was advised of the imminent shift. Commander Stanley Morgan boarded a jet plane on the Australian desert that night. The next morning, he was shown into the Old Man's office. "Commander," the Old Man said after the preliminaries were taken care of, "as you are well aware, you have been in considerable disgrace, recently, for getting too close to the Venusian-Combine war, in defiance of orders. It has been felt, in certain quarters, that you might have caused a serious international crisis." speak, but the admiral waved him to silence. "You could, if you like, point out that the crisis has come, anyhow. As a matter of fact, I never felt that that phase of your action was too important. I did, however, deplore your disregard of orders -- and still do." He paused a moment, while his steel gray eyes studied the younger man. "You are about to receive new orders. It is absolutely imperative that these orders be obeyed explicitly." His pointing finger punctuated his words with slow emphasis. "These orders place you in command of Base Q. The Treaty of Porran, among other things, designates the asteroid Quanlik, or Base Q, as being die territory solely of the Federation and suitable for the establishment of a delta-level energy converter. Because this converter is the prime source of gamma-level, degenerate matter which is used as the fuel for nearly all our power generators, Base Q is recognized as a prime defense area of the Federation. A sphere, one hundred thousand miles radius about Quanlik, was designated by the treaty as a primary zone. Any ship or ships entering this zone may be ordered to leave within one hour. Upon failure to comply, our military forces may take such action as they deem necessary. A sphere, twenty thousand miles radius, is designated as the secondary zone. Assuming the prior warning has been given upon their entrance into the primary zone, full action may be taken against any ship entering this without delay or further warning. "Standing orders with regard to Base Q are that any ship entering the primary zone shall be warned immediately. Upon failure to comply, after the one hour period, full action shall be taken with the forces stationed on Quanlik. Any ship entering the secondary zone shall be brought to action as soon as possible without warning. "Your orders direct you to assume command of Base Q and to comply with existing standing orders regarding the maintenance of its security until and unless advised of a change in the standing orders or the Treaty of Porran." The Old Man paused for effect. "Any questions?" "Yes, sir," the younger man said. "I am wondering if I should inquire what events you are anticipating. Would it be wise for me to ask?" "No!" The monosyllable cracked out like a shot. "No further questions, sir." "I have one. While you were in Australia, I presume you kept well informed on recent developments of Plan K?" "Yes, sir. The school I commanded taught advanced theory of Plan K." "Very good. You will proceed immediately to Base Q. As a final word I will repeat the absolute necessity of obeying your orders to the letterX Good luck." The young man saluted, collected his orders and walked out. Two hours later, he was in space. was perched in a plastic bubble high on a crag overlooking Base Q. Directly below it lay a few of the multitude of locks that provided haven for the protecting fleet of Pships. A vast array of domes and other geometrical shapes bore witness to the hive of machine-shops, storerooms, offices, et al, that kept the fleet operating. And on the far horizon towered the mighty structure of the delta-level converter, the reason for the existence of Base Q. test steel and special alloys, machined to tolerances of less than a thousandth of an inch, with another hundred thousand tons of control equipment, it was yet delicate enough so that it could not have functioned in the gravity field of any planet. This asteroid, small as it was, was barely below the permissible limit. The Commander sat at his desk, watching the latest flashes in the news-caster. They were not good. At this very moment, the President of the Federation was in conference with the representatives of the Combine, discussing the wording of the protocol that would probably be signed in a few hours. And no word -- no hint -- that anyone in the Federation outside the services was red light flashed on his desk. A buzzer sounded a strident call. He flipped a switch. "Commander talking." "Far-Search talking. Report contact with large group of ships, probably dreadnought warships. Range, two one oh. Bearing, four oh dash one nine. Speed, seven five. Course, approaching. That is all," "Keep me advised any change or further details. Advise when contact ranges one five oh." "Wilco." The Commander pressed a button on his desk. In response, his staff quickly assembled to brief him on the immediate status of Base Q as a war-making machine. As a matter of routine, it was always kept fully ready. His staff merely confirmed this for him. Seventy-five thousand miles out in space, the Radars of the FarSearch net swept their paths. Men labored over their plotting tables, noting the information the radar echoes brought back ; slowly piecing together the picture. Tight communication beams relayed the data back to the base as fast as it was obtained. About an hour later, the red light flashed again. The assembled staff fell quiet as the Commander flipped the switch, again. "Commander talking." "Far-Search talking. Contact previously reported now range one five oh. Bearing, four one dash one seven. Course, approaching. Speed, six nine. Estimated twenty three ships, dreadnought type, plus small ship screen. Battle formation. That is all." "Advise at range one one oh." "Wilco." The Commander turned to his staff. "Sound a general alert." His words were clipped and clear. He flipped a second switch on his desk. "Radio, this is the Commander. Get me a direct beam to the Chief of Staff. Highest urgency. Scramble with sequence Charlie." His office had emptied by now. with officers running to their posts as the siren of the general alert wailed through the corridors. As its urgent call died off, a green light showed on his desk, indicating contact with earth. "Morgan, Commander, Base Q, requesting direct line to Chief of Staff. Highest urgency." "Go ahead, Morgan." The Old Man's voice sounded peculiar after passing through the scrambling and unscrambling machines that twisted the sounds into queer pieces and distributed them among several frequencies and methods of modulation. But, even so, it had a note of strain in it that was not artificial. "Sir, when you gave me my orders, here, you directed me to obey them to the letter, without question or cavil. Is that right, sir?" "Yes, it is." There was a threat in the Old Man's voice. "Then, sir, would you tell me if there has been any change in those orders since my arrival? Aside from administrative details, of course?" "No. Absolutely not." "Very good, sir. Sorry to have bothered you." "Not at all. Quite right. Good luck. Signing out." Morgan thought the Old Man sounded relieved at the end. And he could not be quite sure, but he thought he heard the Admiral mutter "And good hunting," as the connection broke. He summoned his aide to take over the office while he went down to the center of the asteroid where I.C., the information center, was located, where he would assume direct command of the base. Ships Supply Officer reported all ships fully loaded and fueled with gamma-matter, ready for flight. The Missile Officer reported all ships equipped with war-head missiles. The Lock Officer reported all locks manned and ready. Base Q was ready. As he climbed to his chair over the plotting tank, he noted with satisfaction the controlled tautness of the men's faces. They too, were ready. As the glowing points of yellow light that represented the enemy fleet crossed the dimly lit sphere in the tank that indicated the one hundred thousand mile radius marking the edge of the primary zone, he took a microphone from a man waiting, nearby. "Base Q to unknown fleet. I have you bearing four one dash one seven. Range one oh oh. Identify yourself. Identify yourself. Over." His words were spaced out with painful clarity. A hush had fallen over I.C. The loud speaker on the wall came to life with a squawk, after a few seconds. "Fleet Four to Base Q. This is Fleet Four, operating under orders from the Jupiterian Combine. Over." "Base Q to Fleet Four. According to the Treaty of Porran, space within a radius of one hundred thousand miles of Base Q has been designated a primary defense zone of the Federation. I therefore order you to leave this zone within one hour. Failure to comply will make you.liable to full action on our part. I have the time, now, as one three four seven. You have until one four four seven to comply. I further warn you that an approach within twenty thousand miles will make you liable to immediate action, regardless of time. Over." The men in the room stared, open-mouthed. All had dreamed of hearing these words spoken in these tones to the Combine. A cheer might have been given, had it not been for discipline. In a few seconds, the loud-speaker squawked again. "Fleet Four to Base Q. Our orders are to assume a position at twenty-five thousand miles radius pending renegotiation of the Treaty of Porran. I suggest you contact your headquarters before doing anything rash. Over." The Commander sat with a smile on his lips. Quietly he handed the microphone back to the radioman. In a minute, the loud-speaker squawked, again. "Fleet Four to Base Q. Did you receive my last transmission? Acknowledge, please. Over." The radioman looked at the Commander, questioningly, but he only shook his head. "Can't you turn that damn squawk-box off? It's distracting." As the minutes crept by, the bright dots in the tank moved closer. The Commander took the Public Address microphone. "Attention, all personnel, this is the Commander talking. The Fourth Fleet of the Combine entered the Zone twenty minutes ago. They were given an ultimatum but are showing no indication of compliance. Therefore, we are going to blast hell out of them." The echoes from his voice rolled back from speakers all over the base. "The people at home do not think we can do it. I know we can. I have not asked their permission. It is not needed. My orders are explicit and fully cover the situation. My orders to you are equally explicit. Go out there and teach the bloody bastards a lesson." He turned back to the men in I. C. "Scramble flights one, two, three, and four. Others to follow at intervals of five minutes until all are in space. Flight plan King Baker. Initial Time, one four five oh. Execute." The talkers took up the chant. "Flight one. Flight one. Scramble. Scramble. Execute." "Flight two... Etc. In the tank, green points of light moved out. The first four came into position and stopped in the four quadrants of the circle of which the center was the point at which the enemy would be at Initial Time. The following flights moved out to other points on the circle. Time seemed to stop. In I. C., the Flight Directors gave the orders that moved their flights into position and briefed them on future tactics in quiet voices. The electronic computers and other devices moved silently. The clock made no noise as its hands moved towards the final moment. The Commander moved some dials under his hands. He pushed a button and a red light showed on the lead dreadnought of the enemy column. "This is the initial target." The designation was relayed to the flights. The second hand of the clock was making its final sweep. All voices quieted. The Commander raised his fist. As the clock's hand came to the top, his fist slashed down. "Execute!" The battle was on. F light Commander Dennis, Flight One, heard the final word as he sat in the small bubble on top of the dense package of machinery that was a P-ship. Swiftly, his hands closed switches. The course had already been chosen and fed into the automatic computers under him. He merely gave the signal to execute. In response, the ship seemed to pick itself up and hurl itself down the radius of the circle to the waiting enemy fleet. He could not see them, but he knew that, behind him, lay the other nine ships of the flight, in column, spaced so close that an error in calculation of but a few caused disaster. But the automatic and inconceivably fast and accurate calculators in the ships, tied together by tight communication beams, held them there in safety. As he came within range of possible enemy action, Dennis pressed another button, and the Random Computer took command. Operated by the noise a vacuum tube generates because electrons are discrete particles, it gave random orders, weighted only by a preference to bring the ship's course back to the remembered target. The column behind obeyed these same orders. The whole flight seemed to jitter across space, moving at random but coming back to a reasonably good course towards the target, utterly confusing any enemy fire-control computers. To the men in the shijjs, one to each, it seemed as if their very nerve cells must jar apart. They felt themselves incapable of coherent action, or, even, thought. But they did not need coherency. Their function was done until the ship was out of danger, when a new formation would be made, a new target designated, and a new order to execute given. Because the electronic computers took care of the attack. They had to. No human could react as fast as was needed. Out from the enemy ships reached fingers of pure deltafield, reaching for gamma-matter. The touch of a finger meant death in a fiery inferno as the gammamatter that fueled the ship and formed the war-heads of their lethal eggs would release its total energy. There was only one defense. The delta-field could be propagated only in a narrow beam, and at a rate much slower than the speed of light. By keeping the enemy computers confused, they kept those beams wandering aimlessly through space, always where the little ships might have been, but were not. Unless their luck ran out. Flight One kept moving in, with constantly increasing speed, except for random variations. Once through the outer screen of small ships, a relay closed and the link was broken betvyeen the ships of the column. Each then moved in independent manner. The designated target was an area to the computers, rather than a ship. Radar beams reached out to find specific targets. As they found them and moved close, the random computer switched off for a small moment of time, while the missies were dispatched on a true bearing. And then the ships moved on, leaving their eggs behind them. The eggs moved in with fantastic acceleration to their targets. Half their energy went into that acceleration, to get them there before the delta beams could find them. The other half was given up in incandescent heat when they found their targets. Becoming pinpoints of pure star matter, they seared their way into the enemy vitals. But, even with their fantastically concentrated energy, it was not enough. For the dreadnoughts were armored with densely degenerate matter, impervious to any but a direct hit, and compartmented to require many hits. The flights moved in and passed on through. And other flights came in. And others followed them. The first flights halted, found each other, turned, and drove in again. Pass and repass. A myriad of bluewhite flashes gave measure of the struggle. the Commander watched the tank. Curt orders designated new target areas as the enemy fleet broke up under the whiplash. Slowly, one by one, the points of light that marked the enemy vanished, leaving only the void. Finally, as must any fleet that faces annihilation, they turned and fled. The battle was over. All that remained was to give the orders to bring the flights home. And that was soon done. The Commander got up. He stretched. He was tired. He glanced at the clock. Two hours and forty minutes. Very quick, indeed, as space battles usually went. But, then, he thought grimly, this had been the first battle ever fought under the whiplash of Plan K. But, now, there was a report to be made. And he did not know how to do it. As he walked back wearily to his office, he tried out phrases in his mind. None seemed to fit. His aide was bending over the facsimile machine as he came in. "Priority orders from the General Staff, just coming in, sir." The Commander looked at the machine. "General Staff to Commander, Base Q, Urgent, Immediate Action," he read. "You are hereby advised that a protocol has been signed at Washington, D. C., with representatives of the Combine, revising the Treaty of Porran to the extent that Base Q shall be jointly administered by yourself and the Commander, Fourth Fleet, Jupiterian Combine, until such time as its further dispensation shall have been agreed. You will, therefore, admit said Fleet upon demand, permitting it to take up such stations as it may desire, in either zone, or to land, in whole or in part, and to disembark such of its personnel as its commanding officer may direct. You will make arrangements with its commanding ofBcer for the joint administration of the base. You will be held responsible for the smooth operation and successful accomplishment of this undertaking. These orders are effective immediately." Commander Morgan smiled. "Send this reply immediately," he said to his aide. "Open code. Commander, Base Q, to General Staff, Highest urgency. Acknowledge receipt recent orders regarding protocol revising Treaty of Porran. Regret unable to comply. Due to recent argument over interpretation of Treaty of Porran, Fourth Fleet, Combine, no longer exists. Request further orders." He laughed. On earth, the officer who took the message gaped at it. Seizing a telephone, he dictated it to the Old Man's aide. But when the Old Man saw it, he only smiled, coldly. And his smile was bleak and cold, too, when he laid it before the President and the Cabinet an hour later. Shortly afterwards, when the President broadcast it to the people, they sat, stunned. It was not until the next day that they finally read its significance and started celebrating. But the Old Man had ceased smiling by that time, and was planning possible future battles. A month later, Morgan sat again in the Old Man's office. Having presented his report and swallowed the unpleasant pill that, as he was now a hero, there were speeches to make and banquets to be bored at, he was talking informally. "What I can't understand, sir, is why they came in. They only had to wait a couple of hours and the whole kit and caboodle would have been dumped in their laps. Yet they come barging in and give us exactly the opening we want. I don't get it." "That is an interesting question," the Old Man replied with a shadow of a twinkle. "You might almost think they had intercepted an order I sent to our Intelligence Officer, on Q, to sabotage the Converter if the protocol was signed." The Commander jumped. "Was that order given, sir?" "Yes, it was. But it was countermanded an hour later. Different channel, however. I remembered they had broken the code of the first channel." He paused a moment. "That illustrates a good point to remember, Morgan. You intercept enemy messages and break their code. A very useful trick. Also very dangerous, if the enemy discovers you have broken it, and you don't know that he knows. Very dangerous, indeed." The young man laughed. The older one smiled, bleakly. As Morgan looked out the window, he saw the public news-casters spelling out the full mobilization of the Federation. A glow filled his heart as he realized the had to, to fight to defend their freedom. Personalities in Seience , was but one facet of his myriad A lonely figure walked perfections -- and probably a minor Florentine streets... In truth, he left few paintings, A pproximately five hunand some of those, unfinished. His dred years ago. Nature did its Magi was never finest job of human creation, and finished. We have his Jerome has apparently been resting up and the Virgin of the Rocks among from the task ever since. This creaothers. And of course, what was tion, an illegitimate child born to Probably the greatest artirtic effort one Ser Piero Da Vinci and a ver produced by mz.n -- The Last peasant girl of sixteen in a village Supper. called Vinci, a few miles from FlorBut, while other great artists of ence, Italy, became the golden man the time collected the huge fees ofof his time and of times to come. fered for portraiture and epic Those were the days of the great works, Leonardo seems to have political princes, of the sinister stwd aloof from the lure of money. Medici clan, of Lorenzo the MagHis notebooks and personal records nificent, the scoundrel of the chart his course as one of bservaRenaissance. Days when intrigue tion, study almost, it appears, of and cruelty were developed as fine meditation on the vast possibilities arts. And through this period and developments which he alone walked Leonardo, contributing to in his time could sense and its greatness, but remaining unchart. touched by its carnality and rottenThus we see him haunting the ness. slums of Florence for the face of While this was the Renaissance Judas to be used in The Last Supfrom which sprang the renewed efper. We see him standing, aloof, in forts of Man to discover and reflect a mob howling around the gibbet of his true dignity, the actual narBandino -- hung by the Medici -- to rowness of the period is seen in the observe and record in his notebook, fact that Leonardo Da Vinci is the peculiar contortion of this last known today mainly as an artist agony -- the facial distortions. Leowithout peer. In most minds, this is nardo was the student who said, no "We have no right to love or hate anything until we have a full knowledge of it." in their revelations of his broad concepts. Sadly, he worried not at all about posterity's interest in his work. He made no effort to keep orderly records. At least # pages of his writings are scattered over the world in various galleries and museums. Possibly as many were destroyed or lie undiscovered. What we have shows that Leonardo founded, through his personal work, many formal channels of today's study. He was the father of engineering, anatomy, geology. He was a biologist, a hydrographer, a geometrician, a mathematician, a discerning student of optics. In a letter to the Duke of Milan, when seeking employment with that overlord, Leonardo listed various capacities in which he could be of value; a list which no employment seeker of today -- with all of today's advantages -- could begin to duplicate : Leonardo wrote in part: "I have a method of constructing very light and portable bridges to be used in pursuit of, or retreat from, the enemy, with others of a stronger sort, proof against fire and easy to fix or remove. "For the service of sieges, I am prepared to remove the water from the ditches, and to make an infinite variety of scaling-ladders and other engines proper to such purposes. "I have also, most convenient and portable bombs, proper for throwing showers of small missiles, and with the smoke thereof, causing great terror to the enemy. "By means of excavations made without noise, and forming tortuous and narrow ways, I have a means of reaching any given point, even though it be necessary to pass beneath rivers. "I can also construct covered wagons, secure and indestructible, which, entering among the enemy, will break the strongest bodies of men; and behind these the infantry can follow in safety and without impediment. "I can make mortars and fieldpieces of beautiful and useful shape, entirely different from those in common use. "For naval conflicts, I have means of making numerous instruments, offensive and defensive. I can also make powders and vapors in the offense of the enemy. "In times of peace I believe I could equal any other as regards works in architecture. I can prepare designs in buildings whether public or private, and also conduct water from one place to another. "Furthermore, I can execute works in sculpture, marble, bronze, or terra-cotta. In painting also, I can do what may be done, as well as any other, whosoever he may be. "I can also undertake the execution of the bronze horse which is a monument that will be to the perpetual glory of my lord your father of happy memory and of the illustrious house of Sforza. "And if any of the above-named things shall seem to any man impossible or impracticable, I am perfectly ready to make trial of them in whatever place you shall be pleased to command, commending myself to you with all possible humility." Leonardo of course went to work for the Duke. For sixteen years he busied himself with all the things indicated in his letter of application. He finished the construction of a cathedral. He built canal and locks. He drained marshes. He invented the machine gun and the breech loading cannon. He built, also, the statue of the horse and painted The Last Supper. B ut above all, he showed that true greatness contains the quality of serenity. He lived simply while becoming at the same time a legend among the people. A lordly figure, he never walked the streets but what all eyes followed him and all tongues whispered. But, beyond all doubt, he was lonely. Aloof from desires of princely splendor or hermitical detachment, he tread the common middle way, yet still above the vices with which many common men combat boredom or life's hostility. In his written pages, he refers to a woman but once and then only to mention her "fantastic face". There is no record of a love affair, nor even an intellectual companionship with a woman. Yet, in his instincts he certainly knew women well. Witness the Mona Lisa smile. The immortal gentleness and compassion on the faces of the Madonna and St. Anne in the painting of the same naiiie. Perhaps it is more accurate to say that Leonardo Da Vinci knew no one, but rather everyone -- no thing, but all things, with an understanding and an instinctive discipline that made it impossible for him to portray -- in any of his many mediums -- anything but truth. When the Duke of Milan, Leonardo's sponsor, came finally to grief, Leonardo's comment was indicative of his character -- of the epic impersonality with which he viewed all things. The Duke's downfall was brought about by the French, who crossed the Alps and took Milan over. Leonardo wrote: "This day, the Duke lost his state, his possessions, his liberty -- and none of his works is completed." Leonardo made no comment on the fact that his own fortunes had been drained by the invasion. His work went on, however. He moved under the mantel of Caesar Borgia, of evil reputation, invented the diving bell, the swimming belt, then moved into a career that took him all over central Italy -- that of a cartographer. Of course, he excelled in this also. Paralyzed, in later years, he lost the use of his hands, but his mind went on working and, in the end, he wrote: "When I thought I had been learning how to live -- I had only been learning to die." This last he did, in his sixtyseventh year. And perhaps we are wrong in saying he lived before his time. Perhaps that will be said also, in future times, of greats who have enriched our present years. -- pwf By R. S. Richardson A New Major Planet ing astronomical announcement one could imagine would be the discovery of a new major planet within the present confines of the solar system. Impossible? Perhaps, but did you know that out beyond the orbit of Jupiter there is a body that at times presents the appearance of a sharply defined disk corresponding to a planet about the size of Mercury or Mars? Moreover this body moves in a path that is nearly circular. You might follow this body for weeks without noticing anything about it to distinguish it from one of the terrestrial planets. This body is one of the most peculiar in the solar system. It seems to be a sort of connecting link between comets and asteroids. In fact, it might be described as an asteroidal comet or a cometary asteroid, whichever name you prefer. Sometimes it is surrounded by a halo like a comet and at other times it shows simply a disk like a planet. And nobody knows when it is going to change from one to the other. This body was discovered on November #, #, by Schwassmann and Wachmann at Bergedorf, Germany. Apparently they picked it up accidentally on a photograph taken for some other purpose as so frequently happens in astronomy. On the discovery plate the body appeared as a starlike nucleus surrounded by a faint coma, the whole being of about magnitude #. A sixth magnitude star is the faintest you can see with your unaided eye. The faintest star you can photograph with the #-inch telescope is magnitude #. Because of the coma the body was called a comet and in the course of time acquired several aliases. For example, you will find it referred to as Comet Schwassmann-Wachmann I, Comet j #, and Comet # II. Suppose that we refer to it as # II for short. # II Troubled Astronomers Right from the start # II began giving astronomers trouble. When a new body is discovered computers try to determine its orbit as quickly as possible before it slips away and is lost again. Although this first orbit is only a rough approximation to the true one yet it is good enough to keep the body in sight for a couple of weeks or so. By that time astronomers will have gotten more observations which will enable a better orbit to be determined. Most comets move in orbits so elongated that they are nearly parabolas. It is standard practice merefore when a comet is discovered to assume that the orbit is a parabola and to issue predictions on that basis, the reason being that a parabolic orbit can be computed very quickly. And so computers went to work on # II assuming that here was another ordinary little comet moving in a nearly parabolic path. But when they began to compare notes they found that their orbits differed so widely that something must be radically wrong. They soon realized that the comet had fooled them completely. Instead of moving in an elongated cigar-shaped path it seemed to move in one that is nearly a circle. Later work has shown this view to be correct. Comet # II moves in a path that is less elongated than that of Mercury or Pluto. It takes # years to make a complete circuit around the sun, never coming nearand never receding farther than Since # II moves in a nearly circular path at such a great distance from the sun we should expect it to be the most stable and inert of comets. On the contrary, only a few months after discovery it began showing variations in brightness, not radical but enough to puzzle astronomers. As time went on more spectacular changes were observed that could not be passed off as errors of observation. It became apparent that here was a little body out in the cold of space that for no reason could change in brightness by a hundred fold within a space of less than a fortnight. The biggest flareup on record occurred in January #. According to Dr. G. Van Biesbroeck, who made the observations with the #inch reflector of the Yerkes Observatory on the night of January #, the comet showed a star-like nucleus from which emanated a broad fanshaped tail. On the next night it looked about the same but was somewhat fainter being about magnitude #. But when he examined the comet on January # he was astonished to find that it had jumped to magnitude #, appearing as a sharp nucleus surrounded by a coma. The following night it was magnitude # and the coma had doubled in extent. Then it began to grow fainter and by February # had dropped to magnitude # again. Brighter Than Halley's Comet The faintest that # II has ever been reported is about magnitude #. Thus what should be the most sluggish of all comets has varied through a range of nine magnitudes corresponding to a change in brightness of # times! Halley's comet is popularly regarded as a Celestial giant. Yet Halley's comet could not be seen even in the most powerful telescope at the distance of # II. Before we can attempt to explain changes of this kind we must first ask ourselves What is a comet? and What makes it shine? Astronomers are agreed that the nucleus of a comet consists of a loose collection of meteorites ranging in size from mere grains of sand up to boulders perhaps as big as a house or larger. As a comet nears the sun these particles become heated and begin to give oflf occluded gases, in somewhat the same way that carbon dioxide gas begins to boil out of a bottle of soda water when it is warmed. A comet will generally begin to show signs of life about the time it reaches the orbit of Mars. First a tail develops, then the nucleus appears and starts sending out jets, halos, and emission fans. Sometimes a comet gets so active it may split in two. A comet glows with a soft ghostly radiance quite different from the appearance we should expect if shown merely by reflected sunlight. What is the source of its luminosity? We now believe that comets shine for essentially the same reason that certain billboards gleam so brightly -- fluorescence. Ultra-violet light or ordinary sunlight shining upon certain chemicals will make them emit a glow usually of longer wave-length than the light they have absorbed. Similarly, the gases of a comet absorb light from the sun and then emit it agciin. For example, a carbon molecule in a comet absorbs a blue ray from sunlight and then emits the same blue ray into space. Thus the spectrum of a comet shows a series of bright bands due to the light emitted by different molecules that have been excited to luminosity by the sun. This theory has been quite successful in accounting for the brightness of comets. But when we try to apply it to # II we immediately run into difficulties. In the first place, it is hard to see how the sun could be very effective in boiling gases out of material that is always frozen solid. The highest temperature which the material could possibly have is about# F, and it is almost certainly much lower than this. It is particularly hard to see how there could be sudden violent emission of gas. Remember, too, that this body has such a small mass that it could not retain an atmosphere even if it were presented with one. Any gases issuing from it will be immediately lost. For the sake of argument, however, we will assume that there is enough gas around # II to form a fairly respectable halo. No Relation to Sun's Brightness We have seen that a comet shines by action of the sunlight falling upon it. Therefore, it seems reasonable to suppose that the sudden changes in brightness originate -- not in the comet -- but in the sun. Over large sunspots there often gas called flares believed to be rich in ultra-violet light. A flare may blaze to maximum brightness in twenty minutes and then gradually fade away in the course of an hour. At first glance these flares seem to be exactly what we need to account for the sudden changes in luminosity of the comet. So far, however, we have not been able to connect a single change in # II with a single change of any kind upon the sun. This does not necessarily mean that no such relationship exists. But it does mean that it has not as yet been proven. The trouble has been that when something extraordinary happened to the comet nobody was watching the sun and vice versa. It began to shape up as one of those cooperative problems calling for a combined effort by observers all around the world. Since # the sun has been kept under watch for nearly twenty-four hours a day. But observations of # II are fragmentary in character, two observers having done about # per cent of the work. It is significant to note, however, that the record flareup of January # occurred when the largest sunspot ever recorded was on the side of the sun turned toward the comet. As seen from the comet, this sunspot would have come into view on January #, passed across the disk, and vanished on February #. As we have seen. Van Biesbroeck reported the comet faint early in January but was amazed to find it around magnitude # on January #, #, and #. Then it was faint again by February #. Thus the comet was brightest when the greatest spot ever known was crossing the sun's disk as seen from the comet. Whether this was merely a coincidence nobody knows. Astronomers have always felt that they could explain almost anything in the sky if only they can get a look at its spectrum. Hence the feeling has prevailed that if they could once catch # II with the spectrograph when it was brit they might be able to clear up the mystery. About ten years ago such an opportunity occurred. On September #, #, a telegram went out from Harvard stating: "Comet # II suddenly brighter, spectra desirable." Observed from Lick Two photographs of the comet's spectrum were obtained with the #-inch Crossley reflector at the Lick Observatory. At that time the the sun and in the telescope resembled a #th magnitude nebulous star without a tail. The photographs showed nothing. Or nothing that was of much help in deciding what was happening on the comet. There were no bright lines and bands such as had been expected. Only the spectrum of reflected sunlight such as we would get from a cold body like the moon. Instead of clearing up the mystery the spectrograms had only served to deepen it. Comets and asteroids are generally regarded as two distinct types of bodies. Actually, however, the difference between them is not nearly so well marked as is popularly supposed. This is the reason why a newly discovered body is called an "object." Astronomers can't be sure how to classify it until they have had a chance to study it for awhile. There have been several asteroids reported surrounded by nebuSchroeter reported nebulosity around both Ceres and Pallas. Herschel also reported nebulosity around Juno but was unable to see any around Vesta. It is easy to discredit these old observations as being due to imperfections in the telescopes. Yet in # an experienced observer, J. Comas Sola, reported # Oceana and # Elsa surrounded by nebulosity, and # Jocasta has twice been photographed with a halo. Thus after a quarter of a century of observation the sudden outbursts of light emitted by Comet # II are still a mystery. The explanation most favored by astronomers is flares of ultra-violet radiation from the sun, but as we have seen this theory has encountered diflSculties. But it seems practically impossible to think of anything else. A series of explosions due to pentup radioactivity is scarcely worthy of serious consideration. It is tempting to let one's imagination roam and assume that # II is being used as a celestial proving ground for some new explosive or disintegrator ray. Perhaps this will serve as a working hypothesis until we can make the trip in a spaceship and find out the real reason. Let There Be Light ( Continued from page #) wick to soak, and held it out to Blackie. He lit the wick from his stick. "It bums real good, Blackie," the girl said, wrinkling her nose against the first oily smoke. "Gee, you're smart to catch one the first day out." "Tell them other dames to watch how they use it!" he warned. "This oughta last a month or more when we get him all emptied." He blew out the dying flame on the stick and dropped the charred wood thoughtfully to the floor. "Naw, I ain't so smart," he admitted, "or I'd figure a way to make one of them work the garden for us. Maybe someday -- but this kind won't do nothin' but fix that goddam road, an' what good's that to anybody?" His woman moved the burning lamp carefully to the center of the table. "Anyway, it's gonna be better'n last winter," she said. "We'll have lights now." I I Sir Editor: The best thing about your magazine is its limitless possibilities. Let me explain; Future can publish nothing but stories in the future; Galaxy requires a space setting; Space Science Fiction and Rocket Stories are strictly limited. All those need a certain type of story. If the public loses interest in that type of story -- blooey goes the magazine... Right now science fiction is going through a big boom, but just as sure as it is on top now it will go under. Look at all the new magazines around now -- only a continued and growing interest in the field can support them (And since we're dealing with cycles we must accept the fact that at one point the thing will reach its peak and then descend). After the field stops growing the magazines that survive and continue will be those that have two qualities : ( I ) good stories and (#) a policy that can adapt to the changing needs of the field. IP's title can symbolize any field of imaginative fiction. At this point it looks like I'm going to grow old along with IF. Best wishes for continued success, -- Dave Hammond Runnemede, N. J. We're striving for both of them, Dave -- in addition to making IF physically attractive, too. And thanks for sticking with us. We'll try to make it worth your while.    Dear Sir: Congratulations on a second fine effort in the May issue of IF magazine. In the short space of two issues, IF has attained heights seldom reached by other magazines even after years of issue. Jungle in the Sky, as far as plot went, was an exceptionally fine attempt and a pretty good piece of writing. Characterization, however, was not good, but the rest of the story made up for this. I found both Welcome, Martians! and The Beast remarkably like a couple of stories Ray Bradbury published a little while ago. The former had a definitely unique twist, but the latter, although interesting, was definitely commonplace. The rest of the stories were definitely up to par, as were the special features. I really think that you should do all you could in exposing and denouncing that absurdity known as the Shaver Mystery. But my joy in the reading of your magazine was dashed to earth when I turned to the letter column. Here my worst fears were realized. I noticed with a good deal of chagrin that someone asked for fanzine revues. Why not have revues of revues of fanzines and really drive the fen (sic) wild? Miss Steiner was right concerning the introduction of new authors. But it so often turns out that many of the new authors should have stuck to being fans. But, by all means, we do need some new faces in the. science fiction firmament. After agreeing with Miss Steiner, my eyes swept down to the next letter, and choked back a feeling of nausea. Here it was, another choice example of the inane drivel which one finds in the poorly printed pages of our cheapest pulp magazines. We have all the earmarks. Teen age slang like "terrif". Reference to stories as "cute". (Or dreamy, groovy, reety-vouty, mellow, or what have you?) I'd like to repeat, please try to keep stuff like this out of your publication. A little slang is fine, but please try to draw the line at utter infantilism. Congratulation again on a fine science fiction publication. -- Ben Jacopetti San Francisco, Calif.    Dear Mr. Fairman: The May issue of IF was even better than the first one and that's pretty good. You were right about that cover, it is good. The story Jungle in the Sky is even better if possible. And I'm not partial to anyone named Milton. I, myself, would like more longer stories, but you can't please everyone... I like the location of your contents page, it is right where it should be. Why don't you put in the number of words after each title, it would add to the enjoyment of your mag. But as it is, it's at the top of my stf reading list. -- Milton L. Olsen Corvallis, Ore. And we're going to try to keep it there!    Dear Ed: I have just finished reading May's ish of IF, and I want to express my opinion. I traded IF from a friend of mine and immediately after reading it, I placed IF as the #rd favorite on my sf mag list. Joiner is one of my favorites and I also liked the cover, that, thank heaven, is different from most of sf mags. Story ratings : #. Jungle in the Sky #. Welcome, Martians! #. Resurrection Seven #. It Takes a Thief #. Dreamer's World #. Infinity's Child #. The Beast #. The Revealing Pattern I would like to see this in print, but I think I won't. -- George Viksnins Philadelphia, Pa. Dear Ed: While the quality, of the May issue was as high as that of the March one I didn't enjoy it as much. I'm afraid the stories were rather stereotyped in the boy-girl angle. However, they made good reading and it is true that you can't please everybody. I would like to make one point clear. Ganymede is not the largest moon in the Solar System as Milton Lesser would have us believe in Jungle in the Sky. Saturn's moon Titan is the largest and it is also the only moon capable of holding an atmosphere. No hard feelings? In my humble opinion Infinity's Child was the top story this month. It presented a very interesting theory .and it seems to me that if so many people make references to the same thing as was showed in this story then there must be some truth in it... At first Welcome, Martians! seemed to be almost exactly like Ray Bradbury's They Landed on Mars but once I got into it the similarity disappeared. What a thing to have happen to you after just completing a # mile trip. A simple case of mistaken identity! This was another I liked. The Beast I didn't quite understand. Why wouldn't or couldn't the men shoot at the creature? It seems to me that they must have been hypnotized by said entity. Otherwise why wouldn't anyone kill something they knew was deadly whether it took the form of someone close to you or not. If you knew that it was only an illusion then what could hold you back? By now this letter is too long to even stand a chance of being printed but as long as I've had my say I'm satisfied. -- Pat Scholz Brooklyn, N. Y.    Dear Editor: You came up with some good stories in the May issue of IF. Congratulations to Milton Lesser for the excellent job he did in writing' Jungle in the Sky. This was by far the best story in the issue. Welcome, Martians! and It Takes a Thief were also well done. The only stories that I didn't like in the May issue were Infinity's Child and Dreamer's World. I enjoyed your personality sketch on Ray Palmer very much. Keep this a regular featifre in IF. Maybe you will turn monthly soon? -- Bob Goodney Ashland, Wis. descending onto a plonet without atmosphere -- no sound, no odors, no rain, no snow; never a cloud in the sky, never a breeze. Night and day the heavens ore black, end each day, according to earth standards, is a month long. In the velvety black heavens, the sun is a steady, bright, colorless light, end the earth is a huge globe, with oceans and continents easily definable. Hayden Planetarium such foscinating features os Adventures in Words, Your Favorite Quiz, Great Names You Should Know and other delightful broin teasers... For this wonderful excursion into puzzle pleosure, just osk your nearest news dealer. It's only # cents -- at all newsstondsl I -- #  TW! I   T Antciican Museum of Natural History Planetarium as one of several astronomical catastrophies that could some day end life on the Earth, here is an artist's conception of what would happen to us under expanding energy of the Sun. For expiring energy of the Sun, see inside back cover. All Stories New and Complete Cover by Anton Kurka, suggesting The Ultimate Re-sowing of the Human Race -- # AD IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publlshine Company, Inc. Volume #, No. #. Copyright #. Office of publication, # Lord Street, Buffalo, New York. Entered as cond Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues: elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are Bctioo; any similarity to actual persons is coincidentaf. Not responsible for tmsoHcited art work or manuscripts. #c a copy. Printed in U.S. A. Next issue on sale January #th The year # seems to be open season on that question. It's been the subject of articles in newspapers and magazines; whole volumes have been devoted to it; it has been discussed over the radio and on your television screen. Many of the leading scientists in America have had a whack at it. The pretty solid concensus is that we will have space travel, but as to when there seems to be a difference of opinion. Some authorities put it at ten years, others at fifteen or twenty, and still others say longer. The chances are that it will be longer -- much longer. Probably not before the year #. Why? Because there are too many elements involved other than the purely physical scientific evolvement of ways and means. First, let's consider the "tractor force" which has moved mankind through the ages, that which will move him on to another planet: that of dire physical necessity, or the fundamental law of survival. plored -- because he had to live. That's basic. Since the beginning of time, Man, singly at first and later in groups or nations, has ventured forth for the sustenance of life -- food, clothing, raw materials, commercial intercourse, economic security -- and he has accomplished it through free exploration or war. As Man progressed, by supplying himself with the basic requirements of life, he gave birth to thought -- spiritual, cultural, philosophical, scientific, political, economical -- which gave to the satisfaction of his animal hungers the veneer called civilization. Today Mankind has multiplied and explored and warred until it populates, in an alleged civilized state of mind, practically every known part of Earth -- at least those parts which are habitable -- eating off it, living off it, thinking off it and deriving varying degrees of comfort therefrom. And despite the plundered condition of that Earth habitable miles, and still enough wherewithal! to sustain the human race for at least another century. So, the all-compelling, motivating, driving force to push Man off the Earth, that of animal survival, is lacking -- at least for the present. why we can't expect space travel before # AD is universal political attitude. There's too much distrust, corruption, petty jealousy, narrow-mindedness and lack of unity in national intercourse today. Interspace travel is the Invasion of one planet by another, and there's got to be at least a fundamental unity between the peoples of the earth if they are going to invade other worlds. It's too big a job for one guy to accomplish by himself in a dark room in his basement. Scientific experiments with rockets reaching toward space -- propulsion, meteorological, survival -- have been pressed for military purposes. Every major nation has its own rocket or guided missile project working night and day to get the jump on its fellow nations. The United States is the best equipped nation in the world to launch a space project, but the moment our enemies hear about it they're going to do everything in their power to knock it down. If our enemies got the jump, the United States would jolly well have to do the same thing. Perhaps space travel will be born during the next war -- much as our rockets, jet propulsion and electronic discoveries came out of the Second World War. Perhaps the Third World War will be one to determine which nation Is to be the first to enter space. When that great, great war is over, the victor, if there be such, will be the ruler of Earth ; there will be no one to contest its right to the skies; and with what is learned and what is left, and with the cooperation of all, it can build ships to explore space and seek another planet. By that time it is very possible tliat such will be necessary -- Earth having burned up the essentials of life. money. It has been estimated that the cost to establish space transportation, with outer planet contact, right -- but how many of these astronomical denominations? The U. S. government is already # fully establish space travel or planetary contact on any permanent basis will probably cost as much as the entire national budget for a year -- how much is it running Take that awesome mountain of cabbage and add to it the extra cost of the super-secrecy required today, the calculated costs of sabotage, the cost of another war -- and there you have it. hardly before there is a basic necessity, a reasonable degree of world unity and a fabulous amount of money to back up the sweat and genius of science. Let's say, pretty soon. Perhaps fifty or sixty years. And that's a mighty short time away, almost infinitesimal, when milestone in the whole history of mankind. -- jlqTim # 'p j r dent of the Western Federation of Autonomous States, had made a number of campaign promises that nobody really expected him to fulfill, for after all, the campaign and the election were only ceremonies, and the President -- who had no real name of his own -- had been trained for the executive post since birth. He had been elected by a popular vote of # to #, the dissenters casting their negative by announcing that, for the sake of national unity, they refused to participate in any civilized activities during the President's term, whereupon they were admitted (volimtarily) to the camp for conscientious objectors. But now, two weeks after his inauguration, he seemed ready to make good the first and perhaps most difficult promise of the lot: to confer by televiewphone with Ivan Ivanovitch the Ninth, the Peoplesfriend and Vicar of the Asian Proletarian League. The President apparently meant to keep to himself the secret of his success in the difficult task of arranging the interview in spite of the lack of any diplomatic contact between the nations, in spite of the Hell Wall, and the interference stations which made even radio communication impossible between the two halves of the globe. Someone had sugfloated a note to Ivan IX in a bottle, and the suggestion, though ludicrous, seemed not at all unlikely. with himself as he sat with his staff of Primary Stand-ins in the study of his presidential palace. His face, of course, was invisible behind 'the golden mask of the official helmet, the mask of tragedy with its expression of pathos symbolizing the selfimmolation of public service -- as well as protecting the President's own personal visage from public view, and hence from assassination in unmasked private life, for not only was he publicly nameless, but also publicly faceless and publicly unknown as an individual. But despite the invisibility of his expression, his contentment became apparent by a certain briskness of gesticulation and a certain smugness in his voice as he spoke to the nine Stand-ins who were also bodyguards, council-members, and advisors to the chief executive. "Think of it, men," he sighed happily in his smooth tenor, slightly muffled by the mask. "Communication with the East -- after forty years of the Big Silence. A great moment in history, perhaps the greatest since the last peace-effort." The nine men nodded dutifully. The President looked around at them and chuckled. " 'Peace-effort'," he echoed, spitting the words out distinctly as if they were a pair of phonetic specimens. "Do you remember what it used to be called -- in the middle of the last century?" A brief silence, then a Stand-in frowned thoughtfully. "Called it 'war', didn't they, John?" "Precisely." The golden helmet nodded crisply. " 'War' -- and now 'peace-effort. Our semantics has progressed. Our present 'securityprobe' was once called 'lynch. 'Social-security once meant a limited insurance plan, not connoting euthanasia and sterilization for the ellie-moes. And that word 'elliemoe' -- once eleemosynary -- was once applied to institutions that took care of the handicapped." He waited for the burst of laughter to subside. A Stand-in, still chuckling, spoke up. "It's our institutions that have evolved, John." "True enough," the President agreed. "But as they changed, most of them kept their own names. Like 'the Presidency. It used to be rabble-chosen, as our ceremonies imply. Then the Qualifications Amendment that limited it to the psychologically fit. And then the Education Amendment prescribed other qualifying rules. And the Genetic Amendment, and the Selection Amendment, and finally the seclusion and depersonalization. Until it gradually got out of the rabble's hands, except symbolically." He paused. "Still, it's good to keep the old names. As long as the names don't change, the rabble is happy, and say, 'We have preserved the Pan-American way of life'." "While the rabble is really impotent," added a Stand-in. "Don't say that!" John Smith quickly erect on the self-conforming couch. "And if you believe it, you're a fool." His voice went sardonic. "Why don't you try abolishing me and find out?" "Sorry, Jcn. I didn't mean -- " T he president stood up and paced slowly toward the window where he stood gazing between the breeze-stirred drapes at the sunswept city of Acapulco and at the breakers rolling toward the distant beach. "No, my power is of the rabble," he confessed, "and I am their friend." He turned to look at them and laugh. "Should I build my pK)wer on men like you? Or the Secondary Stand-ins? Baa! For all your securities, you are still stooges. Of the rabble. Do you obey me because I control military force? Or because I control rabble? The latter I think. For despite precautions, military forces can be corrupted. Rabble cannot. They rule you through me, and I rule you through them. And I am their servant because I have to be. No tyrant can survive by oppression." A gloomy hush followed his words. It was still fourteen minutes before time for the televiewphone contact with Ivan Ivanovitch IX. The President turned back to the "window". He stared "outside" until he grew tired of the view. He pressed a button on the wall. The window went black. He pressed another button, which brought another view: Pike's Peak at sunset. As the sky gathered gray twilight, he twisted a dial and ran the sun back up again. The palace was built two hundred feet underground, and the study was a safe with walls of eight-inch steel. It lent a certain air of security. The historic moment was approaching. The Stand-ins seemed nervous. What changes had occurred behind the Hell Wall, what new developments in science, what political mutations? Only rumors came from beyond the Wall, since the last big peace-effort which had ended in stalemate and total isolation. The intelligence service did the best that it could, but the picture was fuzzy and incomplete. There was still "communism", but the word's meaning had apparently changed. It was said that the third Ivan had been a crafty opportunist but also a wise man who, although he did nothing to abolish absolutism, effected a bloody reformation in which the hair-splitting Marxist dogmatics had been purged. He appointed the most pragmatic men he could find to succeed them, and set the whole continental regime on the road to a harsh but practical utilitarian civilization. A slogan had leaked across the Wall recently: "There is no God but a Practical Man; there is no Law but a Best Solution," and it seemed to affirm that the third Ivan's influence had continued after his passing -- although the slogan itself was a dogma. And it might mean something quite nonliteral to the people who spoke it. The rabble of the West were still stirred to deep emotion by a thing that began, "When in the course of human events -- " and they saw nothing incongruous about Tertiary Stand-ins who quoted it in the name of the Federation's rule. But the unknown factor that disturbed the President most was not the present Asian political or economic situation, but rather, the state of scientific development, particularly as it applied to military matters. The forty years of noncommunication had not been spent in military stasis, at least not for the West. Sixty percent of the federal budget was still being spent for defense. Powerful new weapons were still being developed, and old ones pronounced obsolete. The seventh John Smith had even conspired to have a conspiracy against himself in Argentina, with resulting civil war, so that the weapons could be tested under actual battle conditions -- for the region had been overpopulated anyway. The results had been comforting -- but John the Sixteenth wanted to know more about what the enemy was doing. really only a globe-encircling belt of booby-trapped land and ocean, guarded from both sides -- had its political advantages, of course. The mysterious doings of the enemy, real and imagined, were a constant and suspenseful threat that made it easy for the Smiths to keep the rabble in hand. But for all the present Smith knew, the flireat might very well be real. He had to find out. It would also be a popular triumph he could toss to the rabble, bolstering his position with them, and thereby securing his hold on the Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Stdnd-ins, who were becoming a little too presumptious of late. He had a plan in mind, vague, tentative, and subject to constant revision to suit events as they might begin to occur. He kept the plan's goal to himself, knowing that the Stand-ins would call it insane, dangerous, impossible. "John! We're picking up their station!" a Stand-in called. "It's a minute before time!" He left the window and walked calmly to the couch before the televiewphone, whose screen had come alive with the kaleidoscope patterns of the interference-station which sprang to life as soon as an enemy station tried to broadcast. "Have the fools cut that scatterstation!" he barked angrily. A Stand-in grabbed at a microphone, but before he made the call the interference stopped -- a few seconds before the appointed time. The screen revealed an empty desk and a wall behind, with a flag of the Asian League. No one was in the picture, which was slightly blurred by several relay stations. which had been set up on short notice for this one broadcast. A wall-clock peeped the hour in a childish voice; "Sixteen o'clock, Thirdday, Smithweek, also Accident-Prevention Week and ProbeSubversives Week; Happy #! Peep!" A man walked into the picture and sat down, facing John Smith eralls, and wearing a red rubber or plastic helmet-mask. The mask was the face of the first Soviet dictator, dead over a century ago. John's scalp bristled slightly beneath his own golden headdress. He tried to relax. The room was hushed. The opposing leaders stared at each other without speaking. Historic moment! Ivan Ivanovitch slowly lifted his hand and waved it in greeting. John Smith returned the gesture, then summoned courage to speak first. "You have translators at hand?" "I need none," the red mask growled in the Western tongue. "You are unable to speak my tongue. We shall speak yours." The President started. How could the Red know that he did not speak the RussoAsian dialect? "Very well." The President reached for a prepared text and began to read. "I requested this conference in the hope of establishing some form of contact between our peoples, through their duly constituted executive authorities. I hope that we can agree on a series of conferences, aimed eventually at a lessening of the tension between us. I do not propose that we alter our respective positions, nor to change our physical isolation from one another, except in the field of highlevel diplomacy and..." "Why?" grunted the Asian chieftain. gutteral monosyllable had been toneless and disinterested. The Red was going to draw him out, apparently. Very well, he would be frank -- for a time. "The answer should be evident, Peoplesfriend. I presume that your government spends a respectable sum for armaments. My government does likewise. The eventual aim should be economy..." "Is this a disarmament proposal?" The fellow was blunt. Smith cleared his throat. "Not at the present time, Peoplesfriend. I hoped that eventually we might be able to establish a mutual trust so that to some extent we could lessen the burden..." "Stop talking Achesonian, President. What do you want?" The President went rigid. "Very well," he said sarcastically, "I propose that we reduce military expenses by blowing the planet in half. The halves can circle each other as satellite twins, and we'll have achieved perfect isolation. It would seem more economical than the present course." He apparently had sized-up the Peoplesfriend correctly. The man threw back his masked head and laughed uproariously. "The Solomon solution!... ha ha!... Slice the baby in half!" the Stalin-mask chuckled. Then he paused to grow sober. "Too bad we can't do it, isn't it?" Diplomacy was dead, and he had made a mistake in trying to be polite. Diplomats were dead, and the art forgotten. Poker-game protocol had to apply here, and it was really the only sensible way: for two opponents to try to cheat each other honestly and jovially. He was glad the Soviet Worker's Vicar had not responded to his first politeness. "Anything else. Smith?" "We can discuss agenda later. What about the continued conferences?" "Suits me. I have nothing to lose. I am in a position to destroy you anyway, a position I have occupied for several years. I have not cared to do so, since you made no overt moves against us." A brief silence. Bluff? Smith wondered. Certainly bluff. On the other hand, it would be interesting to see how far Ivan would brag. "I gather your atomic research has made rapid strides, for you to make such a boast," Smith ventured. "Not at all. In fact, my predecessor had it curtailed and limited to industrial applications. Our weapons program has become uni-directional, and extremely inexpensive. I'll tell you about it sometime." Smith's flesh crawled. Something was wrong here. The Asian leader was too much at his ease. His words meant nothing, of course. It had to be lying noise; it could be nothing else. A meeting such as this was not meant to communicate truth, but to discern an opponent's attitude and to try to hide one's own. "Let it suffice to say," the Red leader went on, "that we know more about you than you know about us. Our system has changed. A century ago, our continent suffered a blight of dogmatism and senseless butchery such as the world had never seen. Obviously, such conditions cannot endure. They did not. There was strong reaction and revolution within the framework of the old system. We have achieved a workable technological aristocratism, based on an empirical approach to problems. We realize that the final power is in the hands of the people -- and I use that archaic word in preference to your 'rabble' -- " "Are you trying to convert me to something?" John Smith growled acidly. "Not at all. I'm telling you our position." He paused for a moment, then inserted his fingertips under the edge of the mask. "Here is probably the best way to tell you." The Red leader ripped off the mask, revealing an impassive Oriental face with deepset black eyes and a glowering frown. The President sucked in his breath. It was unthinkable, that a man should expose himself to... but then, that was what he was trying to prove wasn't it? He kicked a foot-switch to kill the microphone circuit, and spoke quickly to the Stand-ins, knowing that the Asian could not see his lips move behind the golden mask. "Is Security Section guarding against spy circuits?" "Yes, John." "Then quick, get out of the room, all of you! Join the Secondaries." "But John, it'll leave you fingered! If nine of us leave, they'll know that the remaining one is -- " "Get on your masks and get out! I'm going to take mine off." "But John -- !" "Move, Subversive!" "You don't need to curse," the Stand-in muttered. The, nine men, out of the camera's field, donned golden helmets identical to Smith's, whistled six notes to the audio-combination, then slipped out the thick steel door as it clicked and came open. The Red was jeering at him quietly. "Afraid to take off your mask. President? The rabble? Or your self-appointed Stand-ins? Which frightens you, President -- " John Smith plucked at a latch under his chin, and the golden headdress came apart down the sides. He lifted it off and laid it casually aside, revealing a hard, blocky face, slightly in need of a shave, with cool blue eyes and blond brows. His hair was graying slightly at the temples, with a fortyish hairline. T he red nodded. "Greetings, human. I doubted that you would." "Why not?" growled Smith. "Because you fear your Standins, as appointees, not subject to your 'rabble'. Our ruling clique selects its own members, hut they are subject to popular approval or recall by referendum. I fear nothing from them." "Let's not compare our domestic forms, Peoplesfriend." "I wanted to point out," the Asian continued calmly, "tliat your system slipped into what it is without realizing it. A bad was allowed to grow worse. We, however were reacting against unreasonableness and stupidity within our own system. In the year #I -- " "I am aware of your hi.story before the Big Silence. May we discuss pertinent matters -- ?" The Asian stared at him sharply. The frown grew deeper. The hlack eyes looked haughty. "If you really want to discuss something, John Smith, suppose we arrange a personal meeting in a non-walled, neutral region? Say, Antarctica?" to dealing without a mask, let surprise fill his face before he caught himself. The Asian chuckled but said nothing. The President studied the border of the teleview screen for a moment. "I shall have to consider your proposal," he said dully. The Peoplesfriend nodded curtly, then suggested a time for the next interview. Smith revised it ahead to gain more time, and agreement was reached. The screen went blank ; the interview was at an end. The Sixteenth Smith took a slow, worried breath, then slowly donned the mask of oflRce again. He summoned the nine Primaries immediately. "That was dangerous, John," one of them warned him as they entered. "You may regret it. They knew you were in here alone. We're not all identical from the neckdown you know. When we come out, they might compare -- " He cut the man off with a curt gesture. "No time. We're in a bad situation. Maybe worse than I guess." He began pacing the floor and staring down at the metallifiber mg as he spoke. "He knows more about us than he should. It took me awhile to realize that he's speaking our latest language variations. A language changes idiom in forty years, and slang. He's got the latest phrases. 'Greetings, human' is one, like a rabbleman says when somebody softens up." "Spies?" "Maybe a whole network. I don't see how they could get them through the Wall, but -- maybe it's not so hard. Antarctic's open, as he pointed out." "What can we do about it, John? Smith stopped pacing, popped his knuckles hard, stared at them. "Assemble Congress. Securityprobe. It's the only answer. Let the 'Rabble's Parliament' mn their own inquisition. They were always good at purging themselves. Start a big spy-scare, and keep it in the channels. I'll lead with a message to the rabble." He paused, the tragedy mask gaping at them. "You won't like this, but I'm having the Standins probed too. The Presidency is not immune." A muttering of indignation. Some of them went white. No one protested however. "No witch-hunt in this group, however," he assured them. "I'll veto anything that looks unfair for the Primaries, but-" He paused and rang the word again. " -- but -- there will be no leniency tolerated from here on down, if Congress thinks it's found a spy, it can execute him on the spot -- and I won't lift a finger. This has got to be rooted out and burned." He began to pace again. He began barking crisp orders for specific details of the probe, or rather, for the campaign that would start the probe. The rabble were better at witch-hunts than a government was. Congress had not been assembled for fifteen years, since there had been nothing suspicious to investigate, but once it was called to duty, heads would roll -- some of them literally. If some innocent people were hurt, the rabble could only blame themselves, for their own enthusiasm in ruthlessly searching out the underground enemy. Smith couldn't worry about that. If an Asian spy-system were operating in the continent, it had to be crushed quickly. propaganda and string-pulling plans for them, he turned to the other matter -- the Red leader's boast of ability to conquer the West. "It's probably foolish talk, but we don't know their present psychology. Double production on our most impressive weapons. Give the artificial-satellite program all the money it wants, and get them moving on it. I want a missile-launching site in space before the end of the year. Pay particular attention to depopulation weapons for use against Industrial areas. We may have to strike in a hurry. We've been fools -- coasting this way, feeling secure behind the Wall." "You're not contemplating another peace-effort, John?" gasped an elderly Stand-in. "I'm contemplating survival!" the leader snapped. "I don't know that we're in serious danger, but if it takes a peace-effort to make sure, then we'll start one. So fast it'll knock out their industry before they know we've hit them." He stood frozen for a moment, the mask lifted proudly erect. "By Ike, I love the West! And it's not going to suffer any creeping eruption while I'm at its head!" When the President had finished and was ready to leave, the others started donning their masks again. "Just a minute," he grunted. "Number Six." One of the men, about the President's size and build, looked up quickly. "Yes, John?" "Your cloak is stained at the left shoulder. Grease?" Six inspected it curiously, then nodded. "I was Inspecting a machine shop, and -- " "Never mind. Trade cloaks with me." "Why, if -- " Six stopped. His face lost color. "But the others -- might have -- " "Precisely." Six unclasped it slowly and handed it to the Sixteenth Smith, accepting the President's in return. His face was set in rigid lines, but he made no further protest. Masked and prepared, a Standin whistled a tune to the door, which had changed its combination since the last time. The tumblers clicked, and they walked out into a large auditorium containing two himdred Secondary Stand-ins, all wearing the official mask. If a Secondary ever wanted to assassinate the President, one shot would give him a single chance in ten as they filed through the door. "Mill about!" bellowed a Sergeant-at-Arms, and the two hundred began wandering among themselves in the big room, a queer porridge, stirred clumsily but violently. The Primaries and the President lost themselves in the throng. For ten minutes the room milled and circulated. "Unmask!" bellowed the crier. The two hundred and ten promptly removed their helmets and placed them on the floor. The President was unmasked and unknown -- unmarked except by a certain physical peculiarity that could be checked only by a physician, in case the authenticity of the presidential person was challenged, as it frequently was. Then the Secondaries went out to lose themselves in a larger throng of Tertiaries, and the group split randomly to take the various underground highways to their homes. The President entered his house in the suburbs of Dia City, hugged the children, and kissed his wife. John Smith was profoundly disturbed. During the years of the Big Silence, a feeling of uneasy security had evolved. The Federation had been in isolation too long, and the East had become a mysterious unknown. The Presidency had oscillated between suspicious unease and smug confidence, depending perhaps upon the personality of the particular president more than anything else. The mysteriousness of the foe had been used politically to good advantage by every president selected to office, and the Sixteenth Smith had intended to so use it. But now he vaguely regretted it. T he tenure of office was still four years, and he could not help feeling that if he had maintained the intercontinental silence, he would not have had to worry about the spy-matter. If the hemisphere had been infiltrated, the subversive work had not begun yesterday. It had probably been going on for years, during several administrations, and the plans of the East, if any, would perhaps not come to a climax for several more years. He felt himself in the position of a man who suffered no pain as yet, but learned that he had an incurable disease. Why did he have to find out? But now that the danger was apparent, he had to go ahead and fight it instead of allowing it to pass on to the next John Smith. He made a stirring speech lo Congress when it convened. The cowled figures of the people's representatives sat like gloomy gray shadows in the tiers of seats around the great amphitheatre under the night sky; the symbolic torches threw fluttering black shadows among their ranks. The sight always made him shiver. Their cowls and robes had been affected during the last great peace-effort, at which time they had been impregnated with lead to protect against bombradiation, but the garb of office had endured for ceremonial reasons. There was still a 'Senate and a House, the former acting chiefly as an investigating body, the latter serving a legislative function in accordance with the rabble-code, which no longer applied to the Executive, being chiefly concerned with matten of rabble morals and police-functions. Its duties could mostly be handled by mail and televiewphone voting, so that it seldom convened in the physical sense. President John quoted freely from the Declaration of Independence, the Gettysburg Address, the MacArthur Speech to Congress, and the immortal words of the first John Smith in his Shall We Submit? which began; "If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy son, or daughters, or thy wife, or thy friend whom thou lovest, would persuade thee secretly, saying, 'Let us go and serve strange gods', neither let thy eyes spare him nor conceal him, but thou shalt presently put him to death!" The speech was televised to the rabble, and for that matter, one of the Stand-ins delivered the actual address to protect the President who was present on the platform among the ranks of Primaries and Secondaries, although not even these officials were aware of it. The address was honestly an emotional one, not bothering with any attempt at logical analysis. None was needed. Congress was always eager to investigate subversion. It was good political publicity, and about the only congressional activity that could command public attention and interest. The cheers were rousing and prolonged. When it was over, the Speaker and the President of the Senate both made brief addresses to set the machinery in motion. ceedings with deep satisfaction. But as time wore on, he began to wonder how many spies were truly being apprehended. Among the many thousands who were brought to justice, only sixty-nine actually confessed to espionage, and over half of them, upon being subjected to psychiatric examination, proved to be neurotic publicity-seekers who would have confessed to anything sufficiently dramatic. Twenty-seven of them were psychiatrically cleared, but even so, their stories broke down when questioned under hypnosis or hypnotic drugs, except for seven who, although constantly maintaining their guilt, could not substantiate one another's claims, nor furnish any evidence which might lead to ffie discovery of a well-organized espionage network. John Smith was baffled. He was particularly baffled by the disappearance of seventeen men in key positions, who, upon being mentioned as possible candidates for the probe, immediately vanished into thin air, leaving no trace. It seemed to Smith, upon reading the individual reports, that many of them would have been absolved before their cases got beyond the deputy level, so flimsy were the accusations made against them. But they had not waited to find out. Two were obviously guilty of something. One had murdered a deputy who came to question him, then fled in a private plane, last seen heading out to sea. He had apparently run out of fuel over the ocean and crashed. The second man, an ordnance officer at the proving ground, had spectacularly committed suicide by exploding an atomic artillery shell, vaporizing himself and certain key comrades including his superior officer. Here, the President felt, was something really ominous. The disappearances and the suicides spelled careful discipline and planning. Their records had been impeccable. The accusations seemed absurd. If they were agents, they had done nothing but sit in their positions and wait for an appointed time. The possibilities were frightening, but evidence was inconclusive and led nowhere. Nevertheless, the house-( leaning continued. On Fourthday of Traffic Safety Week, which was also Eat More Corn-Popsies Week, John Smith vitch IX again at the appointed time. Contrary to all traditions, he again ordered the Stand-ins -- temporarily eight in number, since Number Six had died mysteriously in the bathtub -- to leave the study so that he might unmask. Promptly at sixteen o'clock the Asian's face -- or rather his ceremonial mask -- came on the screen. But seeing the Westerner's square-cut visage smiling at him sourly,he promptly removed the covering to reveal his Oriental face. The exchange of greetings was curt. " I see by recent events," said Ivan, "that you are nervous on your throne. For the sake of your own people, let me warn you that we have no designs on your autonomy unless you become aggressive toward us. The real difficulty, as revealed by your purge, is that you feel insecure, and insecurity makes you unpredictable. I do not, of course, expect you to be trustworthy. But insecurity sometimes breeds inpulsiveness. If you are to strike out blindly, perhaps the talks had best be broken off." held his temper. The man's presumption was intolerable. Further, he knew about the probe, knowledge which could only come from espionage. "I have become aware," the President said firmly, "that you have managed to establish a spysystem on this continent. If you wish better relations, you will have the activity stop at once." "I don't know what you're talking about," said the Peoplesfriend with a bland smile. "I might point out however that at least forty of your spies are either killed while trying to cross the Wall, or are apprehended after they manage to enter my regime." "The accusation is too ridiculous to deny," Smith lied. "We have no desire to pry into your activities. We wish only to maintain the status quo." The exchange continued, charges and countercharges and denials. Neither side expected truth or honesty, and the game was as old as civilization. Neither expected to be believed, although the press of both nations would heatedly condemn the other's lack of good faith. The ethical side of the affair was for the rabble to consider, for only the rabble cared about such things. The real task was to ferret out the enemy's attitudes and intentions without revealing one's own. a little, and lost a little too. He had found many hints of subversive activity, but had betrayed his own lack of certainty by reacting so swiftly to it. Ivan IX, on the other hand, seemed too much at ease, too secure, and even impertinent. "At our last meeting," said the Asian, "I suggested a meeting between ourselves. Have you given thought to the matter?" "I have given it thought," said the President, "and will agree to the proposal provided you come to this country. The meeting will be held at my capitol." "Which you change at random intervals, I notice," purred Ivan with a hland smile. "For security reasons?" "You could only know that by espionage!" Smith snapped. "Your proposal of course is outrageous. The only sensible place for the meeting is in Singapore." "That is out of the question. I must insist on the capitol of my government as the only acceptable meeting-place. My government in contacting yours put itself in the position of extending an invitation, a position from which we could not depart without loss of dignity." "I suggest we delay the matter then," grunted the Peoplesfriend. "And talk about the agenda for such a meeting. What did you have in mind?" "I have already stated our general aims as being a reduction of armament expenses, beneficial to both sides. I think you agree?" "Not necessarily, since our budget is already rather low. However, make your specific proposals, and I shall consider them. Further economy, where not injurious to security, is always desirable." "I propose, then, that we discuss a method whereby agreement might be reached on a plan to divxilge the nature of our respective armaments, including number, nature, and purpose of each weaponclass, as a foundation for discussions relating to reductions." Smith waited for a flat "no" to the suggestion. The Asian leader apparently knew a great deal more about the West's armaments than Smith knew about the East. The Peoplesfriend had nothing to gain by revealing the military strength of his own hemisphere. But he paused, watching Smith with an expressionless stare. "I accept that for further consideration, at least," Ivan said at last. tion and suspicion. Suspicion won. "Of course there must be some method to assure that accurate figures are divulged." "That could probably be settled." Again the President was shocked. It was all too easy. Something was rotten about the whole thing. The Peoplesfriend agreed too readily to things that seemed to be to his disadvantage. The discussion continued for several hours, during which both men presented viewpoints and postponed agreement until a later meeting. "Stockpiles of fissionable material," said the President, "which could quickly be converted to weapons use should also be discussed." Ivan frowned. "I mentioned before that we have no need of atomic armaments, nor any plans for building them. Our defense is secured by something entirely different, a weapon which serves an industrial function in time of peace, and a weapon which I might add was largely responsible for our abandoning Marxism. A single discovery, Andrei Sorkin's, made communist doctrine not only a wrong solution, but a wrong solution to a problem that had ceased to exist." "What problem are you referring to?" "The use of human beings as automatic devices in a corporate machine -- the social-structure of industry, in which the worker was caught and bolted down and expected to perform a single, highly specialized task. That of course, is almost a definition of the word 'proletarian'. We no longer have a true proletariat. For that reason, we are no longer Marxist -- although the name 'communist' has survived with its meaning changed." The conference ended after setting the time for another meeting. been groping in the dark, because of the information-vacuum that kept him from even making a reasonable guess as to Ivan's real aims. He kept feeling vaguely that Ivan was just playing along, reacting according to the opportunity of the moment, not particularly caring what Smith did next. But leaders of states just did not proceed so carelessly -- not unless they were fools, or unless they were supremely confident in the ultimate outcome. T he intelligence service analysis of his latest conversation with Ivan gave him something to think about later however. Andrei Sorkin had been a physicist who had done considerable work in crystal-structure before the Big Silence had cut off knowledge of his activities from the West. Further, the Peoplesfriend's references to industrial usage, coupled with his remarks about specialized labor, seemed to suggest that the East had made great strides in servo-mechanisms and auto-control devices. But control devices were not weapons in themselves. Electronic rocketpilots were not weapons unless there were rockets for them to fly. Automatic target-trackers were not weapons unless they guided a weapon to shoot at the target. It made little sense; he concluded that Ivan had not meant it to make much sense. Smith could only interpret it as meaning: "Our weapons are marvelously controlled ; therefore we need fewer of them." On the probe front, events were about as usual. The lists of suspects and convictions grew bulky enough to keep a large office staff busy with details. More sinister, in the President's judgment, was the small list of suspects who vanished or committed suicide at the slightest hint of suspicion. The list grew at a slow but steady pace. John assumed that these were certainly guilty. And thorough, searching inquiries into their past activities, were made. These post mortem probes revealed nothing. Their records were clean. Their families, friends, relatives, and even their ancestors were above suspicion. If they had sold out to the enemy, they had given him nothing in return for his wages except perhaps a promise to be fulfilled on a Deadline Day. He called the Secretary of Defense and demanded a screening procedure be adopted for future personnel, a procedure which would be aimed at selecting men with fanatic loyalty, rather than merely guarding against treason. "We seem to already have something," murmured the Secretary, a slender, graying gentleman with aristocratic features. "The incidents at the satellite-project seem to indicate that there's something they don't like about our ordinary testing methods." "Eh? How do you mean?" "Three men -- volunteers for the project -- vanished as soon as they found out that they had to submit to all the physicals, mental tests, and so forth. I don't know what they were afraid of. They were already on the reservation. Found out they'd have to be tested again, and vanished. One a known suicide, but the body's still in the river." " 'Tested again'?" the President echoed. "That's right, John. They'd gone through it before. This was just a recheck for this particular project. Of course, I don't know that they were agents." "Mmm ! So they can't stand a recheck. All right, recheck everybody." "John! A third of the population works for the government!" "I mean everybody connected with new projects, the most important installations. This might be a weapon for us." When he received the Secretary's report a week later, John grinned happily. The rechecks had begun. and the disappearances were mounting. But the grin faded when he read the rest of it. Two of the men had been caught attempting to escape. They had been lodged in a local jail to await transfer to the capitol. During the night, the jailer became aware of a blinding light from the cell-blocks and the stench of burnt organic matter. By the time he reached their cells, the men were gone, and there were only sickening fumes, charred ashes, and a pair of red-hot patches on the floor. Somehow they had gotten incendiary materials into their cells, and the cremation was complete -- too complete to be credible. Then the disappearances began to taper off -- until finally, after a few weeks, they ceased completely. He wondered ; were the culprits all ferretted out, or had some of them managed to get around the rechecks? He had spoken to the Asian leader several times, and Ivan was growing curt, even bitingly nasty at times. The President hopefully interpreted it as a sign that his probe was successful enough to worry the Red. He tried to strengthen his position with respect to the proposed conferences, and made only minor concessions such as agreeing to a coastal city in Mexico as the site, rather than the shifting capitol. Ivan sneeringly made equally minute adjustments eastward from Singapore. There was apparently going to be a deadlock, and John was somehow not sorry. Then the cold-eyed face on the screen did an abrupt about-face, and announced, "I propose that the delegates, including the leaders of both states, meet at a site of your selection in either of the neutral polar regions, not later than Seventhday of Veto Week -- which, I think is your Fried Pie Week? -- and come prepared to discuss and exchange information relating to size of armament-inventories and future plans. This is my last proposal." T hey stared at each other coldly. John started to utter a refusal, then paused. Seventhday of... it was one day before the satellite program began moving into space. If he could keep the Eastern Leader tied up for a few weeks afterwards -- 'T'U consider your proposal and give you a reply tomorrow," he said bluntly. The Peoplesfriend gave him a curt nod and clicked off the screen. John chuckled. The enemy's espionage program was evidently geting badly hurt. About one percent of the West's population had been executed, imprisoned, or shifted to other jobs as a result of the congressional probe. The one percent probably included quite a few guilty citizens. "Rodner, I want a Strike-Day set, a full-scale blitz-operation readied as soon as possible," he told the defense-chief. "I know that a lot of your target information is forty years old, but work out the best plan you can. A depopulation strike, perhaps; there are only two opinions in the world, so 'worldopinion' is not one of the things we need to consider." The Defense Secretary caught his breath and sat stiffly erect. "War?" he gasped. "Don't use that word.""Sorry, peace-effort." "No. At least I hope not. I want a gun aimed at them as a bargaining point. But I want it to be a damned big gun, and one that's capable of shattering every major city in the East on a few hours' notice. How effective could you make it -- if you had to?" The Secretary frowned doubtfully and tugged at his ear. "Well, John, our strategic command has kept a running plan in effect, revising it to allow for every tidbit of information we can get. Planning continental blitzes is a favorite pasttime around high-level strategic commands; it keeps the boys in trim. A plan could probably be agreed upon in a very short time, but its nature would depend on your earliest deadline date." "Two dates," grunted the tragedy-mask. "The first is Seventhday, Fried Pie Week. I want a maximum possible effort readied by then, with a plan that allows for a possible stand-by at that date, and a continued build-up to a greater maximum -- to be reached when the satellite station is in space and ready for battle. Include the station in the extended plan." "This is a very dangerous business, John." The mask whirled. "Do you presume to -- ?" "No, Sir. The strike-effort will be prepared as soon as possible." He bowed slightly, then left the presidential study-vault. Smith turned to gaze at his Stand-ins. "You will go," he said. "all of you, to the examining authorities for the standard loyalty tests and psych-phys rechecks." The nine masked figures glanced at one another in surprise, then nodded. There were no protests. The following day he had only seven Stand-ins; Four and Eight had been trapped in a burning building on the outskirts of the rabble city, and their remains had not been found. Smith kept a tight cork on his rage, but it seethed inside him and threatened to burn through as the time approached to speak again with Ivan Ivanovitch IX. The enemy's infiltration into the very ranks of the Presidency robbed him even of dignity. Furthermore, now that the two scoundrels were uncovered, and dead, he remembered a very unpleasant but significant fact: he had, even before his "election" by the rabble, discussed the televiewphone conferences with the Primaries. The idea of contacting Ivan had started, as most ideas start, from some small seed or other that could scarcely be remembered, some off-hand reference to the costly aspects of the Big Silence perhaps, and it had grown into the plan for contact. But how had the idea first come to him? Had one of the guilty Stand-ins perhaps planted the seed in his mind? After he proposed it, they had seemed demurring at first, but not too long. Grimly, he realized that the idea might have originated on the far side of the Pacific. "Who, pray, is the potter, and who the pot?" he grunted, glowering at the nearest Stand-in. "I beg your pardon?" answered the man, who could not . see the glower for the mask. "Khayyam, you fool!" "Oh -- " "Sixteen o'clock!" cheeped the timepiece on the wall. "Fifthday, Anti-Rabies Week, Practice-Eugenics Week; Happy #; Peep!" John did not bother to remove his mask. He sat down quickly and began speaking before any greeting could be exchanged. "I have decided to accept your last proposal. I specify the meeting place as the deserted weather station at the old settlement of Tharviana in the Byrd-Ellsworth Sector of Antarctica. Date to be Seventhday of Fried Pie Week. Advance cadres of personnel from both sides should meet at the side two weeks earlier to make repairs and preparations. Do you agree?" Ivan nodded impatiently, his dark eyes watching the President closely. Smith went on to suggest limits for the size of both cadres, their equipment, and the kind of transportation. Ivan made only one suggestion: that the details, such as permissible arms and standards of conduct, be left to the cadre commanders to settle between themselves before the leaders' parties arrived. "Your continual espionage activities," Smith said coldly, "do not recommend your government as one to be trusted in the matter of agreements without guarantees. My cadre commander will be instructed as to details." The Asian grunted. "You speak of trust, yet violate it in advance by preparing an assault against us." They glared at each other. After a few more words, the conversation ended abruptly, and the matter was tentatively settled. It was Antarctic Summer. The sim lay low in the north, but clouds threatened to obscure it, and a forbidding coastline hulked under the ugly sky. A small group of ships sulked to the east, and watched another group that sulked to the west. Two rows of buoys marked an icefree strip across the choppy face of the sea. A speck appeared in the north, grew larger, became a giant seaplane. It circled once, then swooped majestically down between the rows of buoys, its atomic-fired jets breathing heat over the water. It slid between streamers of spray until slowly it came to a coasting halt and rode on the rise and the fall of the sea. A section of its back rolled open. It pushed a helicopter up into view. The helicopter unfolded its rotors, spun them, then climbed lazily aloft like a beetle that had ridden the eagle. It soared, and travelled inland. The sea-plane taxied west to join one group of ships. The helicopter landed near a long, windowlcss concrete building which lay in the shadow of an old control-tower's skeleton. The tower was twisted awry, and the concrete was pock-marked by shrapnel or bullets dating back to one of the peace-efforts. The President, two Stand-ins, and the pilot climbed from the helicopter. A small detachment of troops presented arms. The cadre commander, a major general, approached the delegation formally, gave it a salute, and took the President's hand. "The Peoplesfriend is already in the conference hall. Sir, with several of his aides. Do you vish to enter now, or -- " "Where are their troops?" "Over there. Sir. As you know, we could not agree to completely disarm the site. Only inside the building itself." "Any unpleasantness?" "No, sir. Their mei are well-disciplined." "Then let's go and get started. I assume that you're in constant contact with the capitol?" "Yes, Sir. Televiewphone relay chain all the way up." John looked around. The Peoplesfriend's helicopter was parked not far away, and beyond it stood a platoon of the Peoplesfriend's troops, lightly armed as his own. An Asian and a Western guard flanked the entrance to the building, but their only weapons were police-clubs. The party entered slowly and stood for a moment just inside the heavy door that swung closed behind them. John Smith removed his mask. "Greetings, hiunan." T he dull voice jcalled it from the far end of the gloomy hall where Ivan Ivanovitch IX sat facing him, flanked by a pair of aides, at a long, plain table. John Smith him. Curt bows were exchanged, but no handshakes. The Western delegation took their seats. John nudged the Stand-in on his right, who immediately opened a portfolio to extract a sheaf of papers. "Would you care to exchange prepared statements to begin with?" Smith asked coolly. "We have no -- " The Peoplesfriend stopped, smirked coldly at his deputies but continued to frown. He peered thoughtfully at his huge knuckles for a moment, then nodded slowly. "A statement -- yes." John slid a section of the sheaf of papers to the Peoplesfriend. The Red leader ignored them, spoke to a deputy curtly. "Give me a sheet of paper." The deputy fumbled in a thin briefcase, shook his head and muttered. Finally he found a dog-eared sheet with only a few lines typed across the top. He glanced questioningly at his leader. Ivan snatched it with a low grunt, tore off the good half, produced a stubby, gnawed pencil, and wrote slowly as if his hands were cramped with arthritis. John could see the big block-letters but not the words. "My prepared statement," said the Peoplesfriend. With that he pushed the scrap of paper across the table. John stared, and felt the blood leaving his face. The prepared statement said : "Is this a joke?" he growled, keeping his voice calm. "You cannot mean that you reject proposals before they are made? I fail to see the humor in -- " "There is no humor." John pushed back his chair, glanced at his men. "Gentlemen, it would appear that we have come to the bottom of the world for nothing. I think we had better retire to discuss -- " "Sit down," the Asian growled. "Why -- " The President stopped. One of the Red deputies had produced a gun. He sat, and stared coldly at the eastern leader. "Have your man dispose of that weapon. This is a conference table." The Peoplesfriend grunted an order to the other deputy instead. "Search them." "Stay back," Smith droned. "I can kill you all quite easily." The deputy hesitated. The leader started laughing, then checked it. "May I ask how?" John smiled. "Stay back, or you will find out too quickly." He unzipped his heavy Arctic clothing, removed a heavy container, shaped to conform to his chest, and laid it on the table. A cord ran from the container into his sleeve. The Peoplesfriend laughed. "High explosives? You would not set them off. However -- Jacob, let them keep their weapons. This will be over shortly." They glared at each other for a moment. "There is no conference?" "There is no conference." "Then why this farce?" The eastern leader wore a tight smile. He glanced at his watch, began counting backwards; "Seven, six, five, four -- " When he reached zero, there was a long pause; then a sharp whistle from outside. "Your men are now disarmed," said the Asian. "Your cadre commander is ours." "Impossible! The recheck -- " "He joined us since the recheck. Further, three of your televiewphone stations in the relay chain are ours, and are relaying recorded broadcasts prepared especially for the purpose." "I don't believe it!" tion, your entire defense system will be in our hands within six days -- while your nation imagines that we are here conferring on disarmament." "Ridiculous !" the President sputtered. "No system of infiltration or subversion could -- " "Your people were not subverted, Smith. They were merely replaced by ours. Your two Stand-ins, for instance, the ones that died in the fire. They were not the original men." "You could not possibly find exact doubles -- " Something about the Asian's smile made his voice taper off. He picked up the container of explosives and prepared to rise. "I am going to walk out. And you are going with me. We will return in a helicopter to my plane. Let me explain this mechanism. I have no control over the detonator, for it is not a suicide device. The detonator can be triggered only by either of two events." "Which are?" The Peoplesfriend was smiling. "The relay would be closed by a sudden drop in my arterial pressure. Or by an attempt to remove it without knowing how. I am going out, and you are going with me." "Why?" "Because I am about to reach in my pocket and produce a gun. Your deputy cannot shoot without blasting a fifty-foot crater where this building now rests." Gingerly, while he watched the wavering deputy, he made good the promise. He kept the snub-nosed automatic aimed at the easterner's belly. But the Peoplesfriend continued to smile. "May I say something before we go?" There was a sour mockery about it that made Smith pause. He nodded slowly. "I hoped to keep you here alive, so that we would not have to destroy the whole mission, including the ships. Of course, when the building is blown up, your little fleet will see and hear and try to respond, and we shall have to destroy it before word can be gotten to your capital. Our plans included that possibility, but it is unfortunate." "Our aircraft will -- " "You do not seem to realize the nature of our weapons yet. And there is no harm in telling you now, I suppose." "Well?" "We have a microscopic crystalthem can be packed into a few cubic inches. The crystals are minute tetrahedrons, with each pointed comer an electrical contact. And there is a 'method for arranging them in circuits without individual attention to each connection. It involves certain techniques in electro-plating and the growing of crystals." Smith glanced questioningly at one of his Stand-ins, a weapons expert. The man shook his head. "I can see," he muttered, "how it might replace a lot of bulky circuit elements in some electronics work -- particularly computers and servo-mechanisms -- but -- " "Indeed," said Ivan, "We have built many so-called 'thinkingmachines' no larger than a human brain." "For self-piloting weapons, I suppose?" asked the Stand-in. "For self-piloting weapons." "I fail to see how this could do what you seem to think." The Peoplesfriend snorted. "Jacob -- ?" He nodded to the deputy, who immediately fumbled in his pocket, found a penknife, opened it, and handed it to Ivan. He laid his finger on the table. He cut it off at the second joint with the penknife. There was no blood. Flesh of soft plastic. Tendons of nylon. Bones of bakelite. "Our leader," the robot said, "is still in Singapore." The President looked at the robot and a great, weariness swept over him. Suddenly it all seemed futile -- a senseless game, played by madmen, dancing over countless graves -- playing tag among the tombstones. Check and checkmate. But always there was a way out. Never a final move. Life eternal and with life, the eternal plotting and scheming. And never a final victor. Almost regretfully, the President turned his mind back to the affair at hand. No one knew, no one cared. For a great lethargy was overcoming the people and their only salvation was -- Gentleman By Rory Magill T he explosion brought "I was looking out the window. Jim Peters upright in bed. He Didn't see no flash." sat there, leaning back on the heels "Must have been further away of his hands, blinking stupidly at than it seemed." the wall. His vision cleared and he This last was spoken hopefully, looked down at Myra, just stirring and reflected the mood of all the beside him. Myra opened her eyes, people. Maybe it wasn't the bomb Jim said, "Did you feel that?" after all. Myra yawned. "I thought I was Oddly, no one had thought to dreaming. It was an explosion or consult a radio. The thought struck something, wasn't it?" them as a group and they broke Jim's lips set grimly. After ten into single and double units again years of cold war, there was only -- huriying back into the houses, one appropriate observation, and Lights began coming on here and he made it. "I guess maybe this is there. it." Jim Peters took Myra's hand, unAs by common agreement, they consciously, as they hurried up the got out of bed and pulled on their porch steps. "Hu would know," robes. They went downstairs and Jim said. "I kind of wish Hugh was out into the warm summer night, here." Other people had come out of their Myra laughed lightly -- a calcuhomes also. Shadowy figures moved lated laugh, meant to disguise the and collected in the darkness. gravity of this terrible thing. "Sounded right on top of us." "That's not very patriotic, Jim. If The fifth "one" exploded in the Mexican desert. that was the bomb, Hugh will be kept busy making other bombs to send back to them." "But he'd know. I'll bet he could tell just by the sound of it." Jim smiled quietly in the darkness -- proudly. It wasn't everybody who had a genius for a brother. A nuclear scientist didn't happen in every family. Hugh was somebody to be proud of. They turned on the radio and sat huddled in front of it. The tubes warmed with maddening slowness. Then there came the deliberately impersonal voice of the announcer:' " -- on the strength of reports now in, it appears the enemy bungled badly. Instead of crippling the nation, they succeeded only in alerting it. The bombs -- at this time there appear to have been five of them dropped -- formed a straight north-south line across western United States. One detonated close to the Idaho-Utah line. The other four were placed at almost equidistant points to the south -- the fifth bomb, according to first reports, exploding in a Mexican desert. We have been informed that Galas, Utah, a town of nine hundred persons, has been completely annihilated. For further reports, keep tuned to this station." A dance band cut in. Jim got up from his chair. "They certainly did bungle," he said. "Imagine wasting four atom bombs like that." Myra got up also. "Would you like some coffee?" "That'd be a good idea. I don't feel like going back to bed. I want to listen for more reports." But there were no more reports. An hour passed. Another and another, Jim spun the dials and got either silence or the cheerful blatherings of some inane disc jockey who prattled on as though nothing had happened. Finally Jim snapped the set off. "Censorship," he said. "Now we're going to see what it's really like." In the morning they gathered again in groups -- the villagers in this little community of five hundred, and discussed the shape of things to come, as they visualized them. "It'll take a little time to get into action," old Sam Bennett said. "Even expecting it, and with how fast things move these days -- bit'll take time." "If they invade us -- come down from the north -- you think the government will let us know they're coming?" "You can't tell. Censorship is a funny thing. In the last war, we knew more about what was going on in Europe than the people that lived there." At that moment, old Mrs. Kendal fainted dead away and had to be carried home. Three men carried her and Tom Edwards was one of them. "Kind of heavy, ain't she?" Tom said. "I never thought Mary weighed much more than a hundred." That night the village shook. In his home, Jim staggered against the wall. Myra fell to the floor. There were two tremors -- the second worse than the first. Then things steadied away, and he helped Myra to her feet. "But there wasn't any noise," Myra whispered. The whisper was loud in the silence. "That was an earthquake," Jim said. "Nothing to worry about. Might be one of the bomb's after effects." The quake did na great damage in the village, but it possibly contributed to old Mrs. Kendal's death. She passed on an hour later. "Poor old lady," a neighbor told Myra. "She was plain weary. That was what she said just before she closed her eyes. 'Hazel' she said, T'm just plumb tuckered.' " The neighbor wiped her face with her apron and turned toward home. "Think I'll lie down for a spell. I'm tuckered myself. Can't take things like I used to." earthquake -- two weeks after the falling of the bombs, and the town went on living. But it was strange, very strange. Art Cordell voiced the general opinion when he said, "You know, we waited a long time for the thing to happen -- we kind of visualized, maybe, how it'd be. But I didn't figure it'd be anything like this." "Maybe there isn't any war," Jim said. "Washington hasn't said SO. "Censorship." "But isn't that carrying censorship a little too far? The people ouLjht to be told whether or not they're at war." But the people didn't seem to c ue. A deadening lethargy had set lied over them. A lethargy they fell and questioned in their own minds, hut didn't talk about, imuh. Talking itself seemed to have become an effort. This continued weariness -- this dragging of one foot after another -- was evidently the result of radiation from the bombs. What other place could it come from? The radiation got blamed for just about everything untoward that happened. It caused Jenkin's apples to fall before they were half-ripe. Something about it bent the yoimg wheat to the ground where it mildewed and rotted. Some even blamed the radiation for the premature birth of Jane Elman's baby, even though such things had happened before even gun powder was invented. But it certainly was a strange war. Nothing came over the radio at all. Nobody seemed to care, really. Probably because they were just plain too tired. Jim Peters dragged himself to and from work in sort of a daze. Myra got her housework done, but it was a greater effort every day. All she could think of was the times she could drop on the lounge for a rest. She didn't care much whether a war was going on or not. People had quit waiting for them to come down from the north. They knew that the places where the bombs had fallen were guarded like Fort Knox. Nobody got in or out. Jim remembered the flash, the color, the rumors, the excitement of World War Two. The grim resolution of the people to buckle down and win it. Depots jammed. Kids going off to join. But nobody went to join this war. That was funny. Somehow Jim hadn't thought of that before. None of the kids was being called up. Did they have enough men? Washington didn't say. Washington didn't say anything. And the people didn't seem to care. That was the strange thing, when you could get your tired mind to focus on it. The people didn't care. They were too busily occupied with the grim business of putting one foot in front of the other. Jim got home one evening to find Myra staring dully at a small handfull of ground meat. "That's a pound," she said. Jim frowned. "What do you mean? That little bit?" Myra nodded. "I asked for a pound of hamburger and Art put that much on the scale. In fact not even that much. It said a pound. I saw it. But there was such a little bit that he felt guilty and put some more on." Jim turned away. "I'm not hungry anyhow," he said. A t ten that night, after they . were in bed, a knock sounded on the door. They had been in bed three hours, because all they could think of as soon as they had eaten was getting into bed and staying there until the last possible minute on the following morning. But the knock came and Jim went down. He called back upstairs with more life than he'd shown in a long time, "Myra -- come down. It's Hugh. Hugh's come to see us." And Myra came down quickly -- something she hadn't done for a long time either. Hugh seemed weary and drawn, but his smile was the same. Hugh hadn't changed a great deal from the gangling kid who never studied mathematics in school but always had the answers. It came natural to him. During the coffee that Myra made, Hugh said, "Had quite a time getting here. Trains disrupted. All air lines grounded. But I wanted to see you again before -- " "Then there is a war," Jim said. "We've been kind of. wondering out here. With the censorship we don't get any news and the people hereabouts have almost forgotten the bombs I guess." Hugh stared into his coffee cup for a long time. "No -- there isn't any war." Hugh grinned wryly. "I don't think anybody in the world has got enough energy left to fight one." "There was one then? One that's over?" Jim felt suddenly like a fool, sitting here on a world that might have gone through a war stretching from pole to pole, and asking if it had happened as though he lived on Mars somewhere -- out of touch. But that's the way it was. "No there wasn't any war." "You mean our government shot off those bombs themselves? You know I thought it was funny. Landing out in the desert that way like they did. "Old Joe would have hit for Chicago or Detroit or New York. It was silly to say bombs dropped on the desert came from an enemy." "No -- the government didn't fire them." Myra set her cup down. "Jim, stop asking Hugh so many questions. He's tired. He's come a long way. The questions can wait." "Yes -- I guess they can. We'll show you where your room is, Hugh." As she opened the window of the spare bedroom, Myra stood for a moment looking out. "Moon's certainly pretty tonight. So big and yellow. Wish I wasn't too tired to enjoy it." They went to bed then, in the quiet home imder the big yellow moon over the quiet town. A moon over a quiet country -- over a weary, waiting, world. Jim didn't go to work the next day. He hadn't planned to stay away from work, but he and Myra awoke very late and it was then that he made up his mind. For a long time, they lay in bed, not even the thought of Hugh being around and all the things they wanted to talk about, could bring them out of bed until they felt guilty about not getting up. Hugh was sitting on the front porch watching the still trees in the yard. There was a breeze blowing, but it wasn't enough to move the leaves. Every leaf hung straight down, not stirring, and the grass seemed matted and bent toward the earth. Myra got breakfast. She dropped the skillet while transferring the eggs to a platter but she got her foot out of the way so no harm was done. After breakfast the men went back outside. Jim moved automatically toward a chair. Then he stopped and frowned. He straighten deliberately. He tunicd and looked at his brother. I I s.iid, "Hugh. You're a man that knows. What's wrong? What did those bombs do to us? Tell me. I've got to know." Hugh was silent for a time. Then he said, "Feel up to a walk?" "Certainly. Why not?" They went to the edge of town and out into a pasture and stopped finally by a brook where the water flowed sluggishly. After a while, Hugh said, "I'm not supposed to tell anybody anything, but somehow it doesn't seem decent -- keeping the truth from your own brother. And what difference does it make -- really?" "What's happened, Hugh." "There W'eren't any bombs." "No bombs." "It happened this way. Long before this Earth was formed, a million light years out in space, a white dwarf died violently." "You're talking in riddles." Hugh looked up into the blue sky. "A dwarf star, Jim. So incredibly heavy, it would be hard for you to conceive of its weight. This star blew up -- broke into five pieces and the five pieces followed each other through space. This world was formed in the meantime -- maybe even this galaxy -- we don't know. So the five pieces of heavy star had a rendezvous with a world unborn. The world was born and grew old and then the rendezvous was kept. Right on schedule. On some schedule so huge and ponderous we can't even begin to understand it." "The five bombs." "They hit the earth in a line and drove deep into the ground. But that was only the beginning. It all has to do with magnetism -- the way they kept right on burrowing toward the center of our earth -- causing the earthquakes -- causing apples to fall from trees." Hugh turned to glance at Jim. "Did you know you weigh around six hundred pounds now?" "I haven't weighed myself lately." "We checked and found out what the stuff was. We'd never seen anything like it before. That star was a real heavyweight. All the pieces are drawing together toward the center of earth. But they'll never get there." "They won't." "We're doomed, Jim. Earth is doomed. That's the why of this censorship. We didn't want panics -- mass suicide -- a world gone mad." "How's it going to come?" "If allowed to run its course, the world would come to a complete standstill. Nothing woidd grow. People would move slower and slower until they finally fell in their tracks and could not get up. Eternal night on one side of a dead planet -- eternal day on the other." "But it's not going to happen?" Hugh's mind went off on another track. "You know, Jim -- I've never been a religious man. In fact I've only had one concept of God. I believe that God -- above all, is a gentleman." Jim said nothing and after a moment, Hugh went on. "Do you know what they do when they execute a man by firing squad?" "What do they do?" "After the squad fires its volley, the Captain steps up to the fallen man and puts a bullet through his brain. The man is executed for a reason, but the bullet is an act of mercy -- the act of a gentleman. "We are being executed for a reason we can't understand, and the bullet has already been fired, Jim. Another ten hours -- eleven hours." "What bullet?" "Look up there. See it? The Moon." Jim looked dully into the sky. "It's bigger -- a way bigger." "Hurtling in toward us at ever increasing speed. When it hits -- " Jim looked at his brother with complete understanding at last. "When it hits -- we won't be here any more." "That's right. A quick, easy death for the world -- from the bullet fired by the Last Gentleman." They turned back toward the house. "Shall I tell Myra," Jim asked. "What do you think you should do." "No -- no, we won't tell her. We've got ten hours." "Yes -- we've got ten hours." "Let's go home and have some coffee." It matters not whether you believe or disbelieve. Reality is not always based on logic; nor, particularly, are the laws oj the universe... Ye of Little Faith T he disappearance of John Henderson was most spectacular. It occurred while he was at the blackboard working an example in multiple integration for his ten o'clock class. The incompleted problem remained on the board for three days while the police worked on the case. It, a wrist watch and a sterling silver monogramed belt buckle, lying on the floor near where he had stood, were all the physical evidence they had to go on. There was plenty of eye-witness evidence. The class consisted of forty-three pupils. They all had their eyes on him in varying degrees of attention when it happened. Their accounts of what happened all agreed in important details. Even as to what he had been saying. In the reports that went into the police files he was quoted with a high degree of certainty as having said, "Integration always brings into the picture a constant which was not present. This constant of integration is, in a sense, a variable. But a different type of variable than the mathematical unknown. It might be said to be a logical variable -- " The students were in unanimous agreement and, at this point. Dr. Henderson came to an abrupt stop in his lecture. Suddenly, an expression of surprise appeared on his face. It was succeeded by an exclamation of triumph. And he simply vanished from the spot... He didn't fade away, rise, drop into the floor, or take any time vanishing. He simply stopped being there. The police searched his room in the nearby Vanderbilt Arms Hotel. They turned a portrait of the missing math professor to the newspapers to publish. Arbright He just wasn't there any more. University offered a reward of one hundred dollars to anyone who had seen him. The police also found a savings pass book in his room. It had a balance of three thousand eight hundred and forty dollars, which had been built up to that figure by steady monthly deposits over a period of years. It also had a withdrawal of three hundred and twenty dollars two days before the disappearance. They were sure they were on the path to a motive. This avenue of exploration came to an abrupt end with the discovery that he had traded in his last yea:is car on a new one, and that sum had been necessary to complete the deal. After the third day the blackboard had been erased and the classroom released for its regular classes. Police enthusiasm dropped to the norm of what they called legwork. Finding out who the missing man's acquaintances and friends were, calling on them and talking to them in the hopes of picking up something they could go on. They passed Martin Grant by because they had heard from him in their initial work. In fact, he had been a little too present for their tastes. After ten days they dropped the case from the active blotter. The .University, seeing that there was little likelihood of having to shell out the reward money, increased It to five hundred dollars. But Martin Grant continued to poiuliT over a conversation he himself had had with John Henderson during a dinner six weeks to the Iday before his old friend had vanished. He remembered his own words... "... and so you see, John, by following this trail, I've arrived at a theory that has to do with the basic nature of the universe -- of all reality. Yet things don't behave as they would if my theory were operating." John Henderson frowned into space, disturbed. Visibly disturbed. Martin watched him with a twinkle in his eyes. "You must have gone off the track on it somewhere, Martin," John said suddenly, as Aough trying more to convince himself than his listener. Martin shook his head with slow positiveness. "You followed every step. We spent four hours on it." He took pity on his friend. "Don't let it bother you. I regard it as just an intellectual curiosity. I've included it in my next book on that basis." A new voice broke in. "What is it. Dad? One of your tenthousandword shaggy dog jokes?" This from Fred Grant, #, student in the senior grade at the Hortense Bartholemew High School, and an only child of Martin Grant. "A little more respect toward your father," Martin said with much sternness. "Yes, Father." "It was my theory.' John Henderson said, "But, Martin, I don't know what to think now. Of course there must be some fallacy that I've missed. The way things stand though, I -- He chuckled uncomfortably. "I begin to doubt myself. I can't quite classify it as an intellectual curiosity." "What else can you do with it?" Martin said. "I know your trouble. It's a common one. You have a tendency to believe things or disbelieve them. Now you've been presented with something your intellect demands that you believe, while your experience shouts, 'lie'." "Is Fred able to understand it?" John asked, smiling at the youngster with fond and unconscious condescension. "Not yet," Fred smiled. "I'm still in high school." "And # you don't want to flunk out you'd better be off to bed at once," Martin told him. "Yes, Father. Good night. Dr. Henderson." Fred's departure left a vacuum in the conversation that took a minute to fill. John Henderson frowned himself back to where he had been before the boy had arrived. When he got there he frowned even more, because it was a state of mental confusion that seemed to have no way of being resolved. "Maybe we can get at it this way," he said. "Let's postulate that your theory is the only logical basis on which reality can rest. B, quite obviously reality does not rest on this basis. We could make C, therefore, that reality doesn't rest on a logical basis. But that doesn't seem to satisfy me. Maybe C could be -- no -- " He glanced at his watch, lifted his eyebrows and stood up. "I really didn't know it was so late. I'll have to be going, Martin. An eight o'clock lecture in the morning." Martin made a wry face. "You've awakened my own conscience. I have an hour or two of work yet before bedtime." The two men went to the front door. John said, "Thank your wife again for me. Wonderful dinner. You're lucky, Martin, to have such a good cook." T hat had been six weeks before John Henderson vanished. Martin Grant mentioned this visit to Horace Smith, one of the teachers in his department, and got himself and his wife invited for dinner on the following Friday. Dinner over, the two professors retired to the library. Two and a half hours later Horace had assimilated and grasped every detail of the theory. He then leaned back in his chair and closed his eyes, fingertips to temples, trying to find some flaw. Finally he shook his head. "It's no use," he said. "Your theory is logically inescapable. But -- " He frowned. "Where does that place us? Probably where some schools of thought have always suspected we would wind up eventually. With the realization that the basic laws of the universe can't be reached by logic or even by experiment based upon logic." "I wouldn't say that," Martin objected. "My theory is an intellectu curiosity, that's all. That's the way I present it in my latest book. By the way, it's coming out soon. Signed the contract a month ago." He pulled his thoughts back to the conversation. "After all, one must hold onto the pragmatic approach to reality. Here is a theory that logic says must be the only possible way a universe can be constructed and operate. It's beautiful and logically complete, but not applicable. No pragmatic value." "Congratulations on the book. But, damn it," Horace said, "it attacks my most basic faith. Logic. Reason." "Faith?" Martin echoed, amused. "Yes, perhaps you're right. That's a word that's foreign to my thinking. Belief is so unnecessary." "You don't mean that." "But I do." Horace pondered. "I can prove otherwise. You believe -- as an example -- that your wife is faithful to you." It was a statement rather than a question. "As a matter of fact -- I don't. I act upon the greater probability that e is. I don't hire detectives to follow her. Nor do I throw her into situations to test her faithfulness. I admit the possibility that she's unfaithful to me. If evidence came that she was, I might confront her with the evidence. Where does belief become necessary?" "Do you believe your son will become a success in life?" Horace asked. "No. I've done everything I could think of to increase the probability that he will. One of the things I've done is to instill in him the realization that belief is unnecessary in thinking. Surely, as a S' n iitist, you realize that nothing V I use in science finds its value Or  ilulity from human belief. If, toil row, evidence were brought Imth that ti i'umometry is based on I ill. icy I'ni sure that mathematiI IS would use that evidence to revise their entire field." "But belief is instinctive; as instinctive as thought itself." "I admit it's a natural way of thinking. It has to be weeded out." "So you're sure you don't believe in anything," Horace said slyly. "Such statements are verbal traps," Martin said. "They mean nothing. You want me to imply that I believe I believe nothing, and therefore I have at least one belief. But as a matter of fact I've built up a sort of mental mechanism for discovering beliefs in my thinking and dispelling them by going to the roots and showing myself why I believed. Belief springs up in the mind like weeds in a garden. Constant weeding is the only solution." He glanced at his watch and frowned uneasily. "Eleven o'clock. We'd better break this up and join the women. We'll have to get together again soon. By the way, do you and your wife play Canasta? My wife loves it." They had been moving toward the door. Now they entered the living room, to find the two women playing the game. "Time we were going, dear," Martin said. "And sometime soon make plans to have Horace and Ethel over for an evening of fourhanded Canasta." At the front door vows of an early reunion were repeated. But they were never to be fulfilled. On the following Tuesday Horace vanished. T his time there were no actual eye witnesses. The time was somewhere between seven and seven-ten Tuesday morning; the place; Horace Smith's bathroom. Ethel Smith was in the kitchen preparing breakfast. Horace was in the bathroom. He called out, "Ethel! I've got it!" "What have you got?" But even as Ethel called out, she heard the sound of the electric razor falling to the tile floor, and there was no answer from the bathroom. Nothing but silence and, as she described it later, a feeling that she was alone in the house. At the time, however, she wasn't alarmed. She half expected some muttered profanity over the dropping of the razor. She didn't wait for it exactly. Instead, she picked up the spatula and expertly scooped the eggs onto their two plates and carried them to the breakfast nook. Next she poured the coffee. Then, placing some bread in the toaster, she started back to the stove, calling, "Come and get it, Horace!" At the stove she started to pick up the aluminum dish containing the bacon. She paused and repeated her call. "Horace!" It wasn't until then that it occurred to her the falling of the razor might have been an ominous sound. Her mind filled with worried images, she rushed out of the kitchen into the hall leading to the bathroom. The door was locked. "Horace!" she called. "Are you all right?" When there was no answer she pounded on the door. "Horace! Speak to me!" After that she ran outside and around to the bathroom window. It was shut and locked, as she already knew. Not only that, it had been stuck for years. With an urgency born of a realization that every second might mean the difference between life and death, she ran back into the house and called the fire department. Also the family doctor. By nine-thirty the police had been called in. By eleven o'clock they had seen the parallel between this disappearance and that of John Henderson. Martin Grant's first reaction was concern for Ethel. His second reaction was that, twice, he had presented his theory to someone and that person had vanished. His third was accompanied by a twinge of fear. He had just finished presenting his theory to the senior physics class! This was followed by an amazing realization. He was conceding that there might be a connection between his theory and the disappearances. He laughed it off, but it returned. It disturbed him. It continued to bother him on Wednesday, so he began to search his mind for reasons. Eventually he found them. There was a distinct analogy between a theory that didn't agree with observable reality, and a pair of disappearances which violated known methods of disappearing. The analogy was so clear that he began to feel there might be a functional relation between the two. Of course, he concluded, it would be reasonably certain if a large number of the students in the senior group were to vanish also. This intellectual conclusion became an anxiety neurosis. So, on Wednesday -- after he had scanned the room anxiously to see how many students were absent and discovered to his intense relief that they were all there -- he spent the full hour lecturing on the necessity -- the vital necessity -- of unbelief in all things, especially scientific theories. But would it work? He vaguely remembered giving Horace a similar lecture. Wednesday night just before retiring he had another disturbing thought. He had explained the theory to his son. But that had been weeks before, and Fred was steeped in the mechanism of unbelief. Good thing, or he might have been the first to disappear. "What's the matter with you, Martin? Can't you even answer when -- " The rest of what his wife was saying faded in the startled realization that he was eating dinner. "Sorry, dear," he murmured. "I was thinking." He was trying to recall something that might tell him what day it was. It was obviously evening or they wouldn't be eating dinner. "Uh," he said casually, "what day is today?" "Saturday," Fred said. "Now Fred, don't tease your father about his absent-mindedness. This is Thursday." Thursday! That was right. He had given the lecture on the necessity of unbelief today. There was tomorrow, when he could see if any of the class had disappeared yet. He rniildn't be certain, of course, just li( i ausc a student didn't show up didn't mean he or she had vanished. He fixed his eyes on Fred, across the table, and smiled. Fred, at least, was a source of comfort. He knew the theory and hadn't vanished. "Dad," Fred said. "I've been wondering if you saw a point of similarity in the two disappearances?" Martin thought, good heavens, does he have any inkling of what I've been thinking? Of course not! He's just fumbling. Better to discourage him. "Sorry, son. There aren't any similarities except accidental ones. I've had the confidence of the police on this. The cases are quite unrelated." Fred refused to be sidetracked. "Dr. Henderson's face lit up as though a sudden idea had struck him. I talked with some of his students. That's what they all thought. And Horace Smith shouted to his wife, 'Ethel! I've got it!' The next instant in each case they vanished into thin air." "But that doesn't mean a thing." Martin Grant allowed himself to become excited. Fred had unwittingly come upon the vital clue to the two disappearances. "Let's be clear about this," he said to himself, drumming on his desk nervously with his fingers. "Undoubtedly there's a connection between the vanishing and my theory. Both Horace and John arrived at something I've missed. And since my theory is exhaustive it can't be there. It must be -- yes -- it must be that they went a step farther." He pondered this a moment and added grudgingly, "A step I have missed." Then even more grudgingly, "An obvious step." Automatically he opened a drawer and brought out a sheet of paper and a pencil. He wrote : The theory contains within itself the proof that the universe must, by logical necessity, be constructed according to said theory. But observation and experience say this is not true. He frowned at what he had written. This was the conclusion to which he had led both men. It was the conclusion upon which he had rested. They, obviously, had not rested there. They had gone on. Under what he had written he wrote "Either:" on the left hand margin. Two Inches under it he wrote, "Or:" Then he frowned at them. Suddenly he began writing rapidly after the Either: "The universe is not constructed according to logical necessity." He hesitated, studying what he had written. Then, pursing his lips, he slowly wrote after the Or: "the observable universe is not the universe." He nodded to himself. That hit at the core of the matter. A was X. B was not X. Therefore B was not A. Even though A and B were both called universe. The question was, then -- did the universe-of-logical-necessity exist? If so, what relationship did it have to the observable universe which quite obviously did exist? Was that the question, the answer to which, gained in a moment of insight, had caused two men to utterly vanish? He sighed with real regret. There was no way of knowing. Possibly a mechanical brain of the most advanced type could come out with a comprehensive picture after solving thousands of successive equations. Knowledge of simple basics was a far cry from a fully expanded system. He pushed the sheet of paper away with a show of irritation. He was missing something. He was on the wrong track. Neither John nor Horace had the mental equipment to make more than a simple step beyond what he had accomplished. That was certain. It was equally certain that he could and would make it. A startled expression appeared on his face. "Oh good lord!" he groaned. "My book. I must do something about that the first thing tomorrow. I -- " He opened the drawer of his desk and took out an oblong of paper, the check against advance royalties. "I'll return this and not let them publish it. First thing in the morning. And from now on I resolve not to think of my theory or what caused John and Horace to vanish." Folding the check neatly, he stuck it in his billfold and then started to read a book that interested him. He became engrossed in it. Half an hour later he came to enough to realize he was on safe ground, sigh with relief, and sink back Into the trains of thought of the book. It was a nice feeling to know he was safe. shining brightly and the monotony of the blue sky was relieved here and there by filmy white clouds that gave it a pleasing threedimensionalness. But to Martin Grant there was something unreal about things. He decided it must be the light. Things stood out with too sharp clarity. When he reached his office at the university he made arrangements for a substitute to take his ten o'clock class. Then he called the publishing company and made an appointment for ten-fifteen. The hour from nine to ten seemed interminably long. He found it almost impossible to concentrate on such an unimportant subject as the application of tensor analysis to electronic circuits. Ten o'clock came. He hurried to the parking lot and got in his car. It was real and comforting. But once again everything outside the windshield seemed too sharply defined. He timed himself on the way across town to the publishing house. He would have to allow himself the same time to return for his eleven o'clock class. It took twelve minutes, plus another two to find a parking place. Two minutes from the car to the eleventh floor. He was frowning at his watch as he entered the publisher's office. "Well well, Dr. Grant! Glad to sec you. I suppose you're anxious to see your book ready for market. It's coming very well. Just came back from the typesetters and is going into its first printing right away." "Huh?" Martin said, completing his mental arithmetic and jerking into an awareness of his surrounditii's "Oh, hello Mr. Browne," he s.M.I "I w.is just figuring my time. I ivc ati eleven o'clock class. I can only stay twenty-seven minutes. That gives me a three minute margin of error for traffic delays." "I see," the publisher said, a twinkle in his eye. "As I was just saying, your book -- " "Oh yes, my book," Martin interrupted. "Just a minute." He took out his billfold and extracted the check, handing it to Mr. Browne. "What's this for?" Mr. Browne asked, unfolding it. "Oh, the advance royalty check. Is something wrong with it?" "I'm returning it," Martin said. "I can't let you publish my book." "Can't let me publish it!" Browne exclaimed. "Why not? Don't tell me it infringes on someone else's copyright!" "No. Nothing like that. I've merely decided I don't want it published. I'm returning your check." "Well now, look!" Browne said. "We're a business establishment. You signed a contract. We signed one too. It protects both of us against just this sort of thing, you know." He studied Martin thoughtfully. "Sit down and relax," he invited. "I'm hiunan. Tell me why you don't want it published. Maybe I might agree with you. We have over a thousand dollars tied up already in typesetting, but -- " Martin took the seat and glanced nervously at his watch to make sure the twenty-seven minutes hadn't elapsed. "I've just changed my mind," he said curtly. "There are certain things -- I'm the head of a department, you know. I must watch my reputation. That's it, my reputation. On due reflection I believe the book might hurt my standing." "In what way?" Browne asked. "To tell you the truth, your other book did so well I didn't bother reading this one." "There's a -- " Martin brought himself up short. So Browne hadn't read it. So much the better. At least he wouldn't vanish. "I'm afraid,' he added with a self-conscious chuckle that he hoped was genuine enough to pass, "the subject matter is a little too crackpots tish in spots. That's the whole thing. It would reflect on my reputation." "Maybe we could do a little editing on it," Browne said. "Cut out the parts you think crackpottish and substitute something else in those pages. I'll get the galleys and we can look at them." "No!" Martin said. "No, I'm afraid we would have to cut out at least half of the book. No. The best thing is to forget it, but I'll make good your typesetting loss. I can pay you two hundred dollars right away and fifty dollars a month." Browne lit a cigarette slowly, his eyes on Martin. "You're serious, aren't you," he said. "I'll tell you what we'll do. We'll let the whole thing ride for the present. Maybe later -- " "No!" Martin said. "It must never be published! It's very vital that it never be published." "Okay," Browne said. "We won't publish it. We have the contract, but -- we won't publish it." "Thanks, very much," Martin said. "I must hurry back." The publisher stared thoughtfully at the closed door after Martin had gone. He glanced down at the check. large, capable of holding four hundred students in its successive tiers of seats, plus the teacher on his raised platform immediately in front of the large blackboard. In previous years there had been instances of students slipping out after roll call. In spite of everything, it had happened. Therefore a new system had been inaugurated. Before roll call Martin marched to the back of the room to the only exit and locked it. Pocketing the key, he returned to his podium. It had been going on this way for two years, and was now automatic. The day watchman, making his rounds, approached this door at precisely two thirty-four. He heard violent pounding. Along with the pounding there was a loud, hoarse voice, gasping, "Lemme out! Lemme out!" The watchman consulted his clock -- the one he used to make a record of his rounds -- and determined that it was two thirty-four. He knew that it was Dr. Grant's senior theoretical physics lecture period. He recalled that a couple of years before Dr. Grant had had trouble with students slipping out after roll call. But it occurred to him that it was hardly possible to sneak out, even on Dr. Grant, absent-minded as he was, by pounding on the door and shouting, "Lemme out!" in a terrified tone of voice. He therefore stopped and knocked on the door, calling, "What's going on in there?" ' Whoever was doing the pounding and shouting evidently didn't hear him. Waiting no longer, the day watchman used his master key on the door. A smallish young man, later identified as Mark Smythe, attempted to run past him into the hall. The watchman blocked Mark's escape and looked toward the podium in an automatic appeal to Dr. Grant. Dr. Grant was not there. The podium was unoccupied. So were all four hundred seats. There was, in fact, no one in room # except the one terrified student. In due course the police arrived, along with the regents. By five o'clock it had become certain that the greatest mass disappearance of all times had occurred, with Mark Smythe as the sole witness. He stuck to his story through repeated detailed questionings, and in the end the police were stuck with it. According to Smythe, class had begun as usual. Dr. Grant had waited until one minute after the bell had sounded, then had marched back and locked the door, and returned to the front. He had rapidly scanned the room to see if there were any absences, quickly called half a dozen names he was uncertain of, and marked the attendance slip. The police found it still resting on the table where he had placed it. Then he had begun his lecture by reni.'irking that they were behind St bedule and would have to eat(h up. He had been speaking ilriii liy tilln.ime of Marvin Green jmiipcd to his feet in great excitement, waving his hand and shouting, "Dr. Grant! Dr. Grant!" Dr. Grant had stopped his lecture and frowned darkly, then said, "If you will please take your seat -- " "But Dr. Grant!" Marvin Green had interrupted him excitedly. "I've got it! I've got it!" What had happened then was impossible for the mind to accept. Marvin Green had simply ceased to be. There had been a stunned silence. And in that silence, it went on. Student after student popping out of existence in what seemed to be a chain reaction. He wasn't aware when Dr. Grant vanished. All he knew was that when at last he was alone he looked toward the podium and the professor was also gone. He kept waiting to go himself. When he didn't, he lost the fear that had rooted him to the spot, and rushed to the exit where he at first tried to break down the door and make his escape, then subsided into pounding and shouting for help when he realized his physical strength was Insufficient for the job. Questioning didn't bring out any additional fact, nor alter any statement. There had been no sound to the vanishing, no movement of the person that could be considered significant, no flashes of light, no strange odors. Nothing. F red grant got the flash on his hot rod radio on the way home from high school. At the end of the report Fred wrote down Mark Smythe's address on a scrap of paper, and drove home to be with his mother. It was three days before he could get away. On the morning of the third day, his aunt Emily arrived to take charge of things, and he was able to slip away. He drove immediately to Mark Smythe's address. It was one of the better class rooming houses near the campus. The landlady wasn't going to let him in nor announce him until he explained he was the son of the professor who had vanished. She immediately swung to the other extreme and didn't bother to find out if Mark wanted to see him. "My father was your teacher," Fred said. "Oh? Come on in." There were tennis rackets. On the bookshelves there were tennis books. On a table there was a tennis trophy. Otherwise there was just a bed, a rug, and two or three chairs. "I don't know what I can tell you more than I've already told the police and the reporters," Mark said apologetically. "I guess it's tough, losing your father..." "Yeah," Fred agreed. "I wanted to ask you something though. Dad gave a lecture on his new theory a few days ago, didn't he?" Mark looked at him blankly. Then, "Oh! I guess he did. As a matter of fact I didn't pay much attention to it." He grinned. Then he remembered he should be solemn and stopped grinning. "I -- I sort of slipped by it. He made the mistake of telling us ahead of time it was off the course and no questions on it would be in the finals, so I more or less rested up during the period for a tennis match afterwards. Why?" "Didn't you get any of what he said?" Fred jaersisted. "Oh, a little," Mark admitted. "It was about some system of arriving at the basic laws of nature by pure logic, only what you arrived at didn't agree with facts. Some kind of intellectual curiosity." He thought a minute. "Oh," he said, "I see what you want. Didn't he leave any , notes on it? It would be too bad if his theory was lost to the world now that -- " He left the rest unsaid. "Maybe you can remember something," Fred coaxed. "Anything. Did he talk about his theory again?" "Next day he gave a lecture on the necessity of unbelief in modem science. It was pretty good. He overemphasized it, though. Some of the kids thought he was making a relion of unbelief." "What did they say about his theory?" Fred asked quickly. "Oh, they were quite impressed. Two of them live -- lived here in the rooming house. They were up here that evening tossing it back and forth. I was too tired from the tag match. I let them talk." "What did they think about it?" Mark frowned in an effort to recall. "It had to do with this universe being basically illogical, or at least seeming to be, because it didn't agree with your father's theory. They started building up fantasies on it. One I remember was a good one." "What was that?" "I think it was Jimmy. He said it would be funny if we were here because we believed this universe was the only real one. Something about inherited memory. Our coming from a long line of people who believed this was the only place, because all our ancestors who didn't believe it shot off into some other universe and had their children there. Utterly crazy. You know." "Yeah, I know," Fred agreed. "You going to be around in case I want to see you again?" "God! I hope so!" Mark said. "It makes me nervous." "You're safe enough," Fred said. "Well -- thanks. I'll be seeing you." H e smoothed out the crumpled sheet of paper and glanced at it. "What do you hope to find, Fred," his mother asked. "I don't know," he said. "Anything, I -- maybe this is something. Look." Together they read, "Either: the universe is not constructed according to logical necessity. Or: the observable universe is not the universe." There were doodlings along the right margin that meant nothing. "What does it mean?" Mrs. Grant asked. "Probably just something connected with his classes," Fred shrugged. He went on searching the waste basket, giving his mother no hint that he had already found what he was .searching for. From the position of the paper in the wa.ste basket he felt reasonably sure it had been recently written. It was probably a voicing of thoughts gained from the disappearance of Horace and John, because up to that time his father had assumed his theory was just an intellectual curiosity. His father couldn't have asked himself if the observable universe might not be the universe unless something had happened to raise a doubt, or suggest an alternative as a possibility. Mrs. Grant's interest lessened. She wandered about the room, perhaps reliving memories. It gave Fred a chance to put the piece of paper in his pocket so that when he put everything back in the waste basket his mother would dismiss the whole search. There was, of course, the file with the entire theory in it. He knew the theory by heart, however, and had no need of that file. "I think I'll go out for a while. Mom," he said. "All right, Fred," she said disinterestedly. Outside he climbed behind the wheel of his hot rod and sat there, making no motion to start the motor. He was thinking. Mark Smythe h said that he overheard two of his fellow classmen discussing the theory, one of them remarking that, "It would be funny if we were here just because we were descended from a long line of people who believed this was the only place." Could that be the key? Take gravitation, for instance. If it were something that some vital part of you had to believe, and that vital part didn't believe, would the entire person go flying off into space? What about inanimate matter? Did it have to believe too? And what about other forms of life? Or was everything except human beings just part of the props? He shook his head. That didn't seem like quite the right track. He took another. The human mind builds up a picture of the outside universe through its senses. Sometimes its ideas are wrong. Right or wrong, inside everyone's mind is a universe, derived from the outside universe. What if the outside universe were derived from something? Derived from what? The real, logically necessary universe? That could be. At least it seemed to have some value as a starting point. He tried to reason from that point. Frustration grew in him. He wished he were older, had his university education behind him. There were so many things he couldn't begin to deal with. Maybe he could take the entire problem to some of his father's friends. He shook his head over this thought. From all that had gone on it was too likely that the minute one of them discovered something that would be of help he would disappear before he could tell it! That raised another point. Why didn't he himself vanish? What was there different about him? A lot. His father had instilled in him a lot of the things he himself could only aspire to. Unbelief was the major thing. Or perhaps it was the other major thing, remembrance. His father's voice came into consciousness, saying something he had said so many times it was grooved deeply in memory, even to the inflections of voice. "All psychoses and mental troubles are caused by walled-off unpleasant memories. The child who trains himself to recall all unpleasant things and deliberately associate them with the feeling that they are valuable lessons, but harmless, will grow up in perfect balance." He smiled. He could let flow through consciousness, dozens of incidents he had taken up with his father. He was definitely different than others around him. So different he had systematically disguised it by a front of accepted behavior -- systematically and consciously, under his father's guidance. There was a chance those differences made him safe. There was a chance those differences would make it possible for him to find out what caused the others to vanish, without he himself vanishing. The other train of thought inserted itself into consciousness again. Was belief the key to the disappearances? attention when the theory was being explained. The others had undoubtedly lapped it up. The peculiar thing about the theory was that it was so logical and so inevitable that the mind tended to accept it, bplieve it to be true in spite of the evidence of the senses. Let us suppose, Fred mused, that deep within the mind there is some matrix of thought that ties the human to this universe. A matrix that could conceivably be altered, and when altered would automatically shift the person to another universe that the altered matrix fitted. The subconscious usually took time to absorb and react. That was another thing his father had taught him to observe. Learn something, and it takes from days to months for it to become lodg in the subconscious and to rise into operation naturally from there. John Henderson had taken six weeks to vanish after having learned the theory. It had taken Horace Smith three and a half days, but he had had the added factor of Dr. Henderson's disappearance to trigger reactions. The theoretical physics class had taken three days exactly, and its vanishing had been a sort of group action or chain reaction, with intensely emotional reaction after the first student had vanished before the eyes of the others. His own father, originator of the theory, had probably fallen into the trap of starting to believe after Horace had vanished, so it became a greater probability that the disappearance was related to knowledge of the theory. Seeing the students vanish had probably set up an emotional state where complete belief was precipitated. In the whole series the only improbable part was that so many students would react in the same short time. That was partly nullified by the fact that it was a special class, and only high I.Q. students with excellent records were accepted. They would tend to be somewhat identical in reaction times. He straightened up and stared through the windshield at the dark street. So there it was, the probable mechanism of vanishment. A system was fed into the conscious mind. The conscious mind accepted it. In due time that system was transferred down into the matrix that held the person in this reality or universe. Once there, it made the whole person transfer to a system where the altered matrix fitted. It might not be the system pictured in his father's theory. It might be a compromise system. Where and when probably had no meaning in relation to the two systems. That was why, when the shift came, the person vanished instantly without any strange manifestations of any kind. Was it reversible? If so, then some of those who had vanished would reappear eventually. A sudden, startling thought made Fred sit up straight, his eyes shining with excitement. So far he had been safe mainly because he habitually didn't attach belief to anything. His other facet of difference might be the means of his testing this without real danger of vanishing. Could he dredge up from the deepest layers of unconscious thought, the threads leading directly to the matrix that held him in his surroundings and learn consciously what it was? A thought. He reflected on it, then decided before he made any decisions he would explore the other avenue, the one the police had naturally thought of. Was there some person or persons unknown in back of the disappearances? Some non-human, perhaps? It could fit into the same theory of disappearance. Another universe, beings in that universe. Beings who perhaps didn't want knowledge of their universe to become known on this side of the veil. If so, why hadn't they snatched him too? Maybe they didn't know he knew about the theory. He'd never talked about it to anyone. But his father had drilled it into him as a supreme example of the reasons why belief in anything was a trap. He shook his head. It didn't seem likely that the disappearances had been engineered by anyone. They smacked too much of an inner pattern, an inner mechanism. So he came back to the other theory. What could he try to accomplish by exploring into his deepest substratum of thought? The ideal he could aim for would be conscious transfer into the other system with the assurance beforehand that he could transfer back again. If he could do that, and if he could find those who had vanished, maybe he could teach them how to return. It was something that might take a long time, he realized. His first objective was to penetrate deeper into his mind than anyone had ever consciously gone before. That alone could take a lifetime. Or it might be accomplished overnight. How would he begin? Where would be begin? he shrugged. It didn't matter. He would have to systematically extend his ability to be aware in every direction, physical and temporal, until he could be conscious of his individual blood cells if it were possible, and completely and vividly conscious, at will of every second of his past life. If that didn't lead him to his objective, it might at least point the way and increase his ability to reach his goal. That evening, Fred arrived home to find a stranger seated in the library. There was the usual moment of clumsiness such encounters generate, but Fred's mother returned with a tea tray before self-introductions became necessary. She said, "Mr. Gaard, this is my son, Fred." The man smiled easily as Mrs. Grant continued, speaking now to Fred. "This is Curt Gaard, Fred. I called on him today and what do you think I discovered. "He was a friend -- a very old friend -- of your father." Mrs. Grant stopped, a certain inward uncertainty showing through. Fred stood mute, giving voice to none of the questions which sprang up in his mind. Curt Gaard, completely at ease, took up the lead. Even as a feeling of familiarity sprang into Fred's mind, Gaard said, "I knew your father -- met him several times -- but we weren't as close as your mother's words might imply." Then Fred knew. He spoke suddenly. "You're a psychiatrist." The pieces fell into place. Fred's father had mentioned this man several times, and the boy knew he was not there by chance -- that his mother had contacted the psychiatrist -- this particular one because she too had remembered the acquaintanceship. For a moment, Fred was annoyed with his mother. Why on earth had she brought a psychiatrist into this? Then he softened as he realized she felt it to be to her son's best interests. "Yes, I'm a psychiatrist," Gaard said. Then, as though he could read Fred's mind: "Your mother did send for me, but so far as I'm concerned, it's more than just a professional visit. I knew your father and liked him. I'd like to be your friend." "You plan to psychoanalyze me?" "Don't be so grim about it," Curt Gaard smiled. "Just let's me this a social visit. There will be plenty of time for other things later. Perhaps you can drop in at my office." "Perhaps," Fred said, almost absently. A short time later he excused himself and went to his room. M rs. grant?" Mr. Browne said, smiling at the woman behind the screen door. "I'm Mr. Browne the publisher." "Browne?" she said. "Oh yes. My hus -- husband has mentioned you." "Favorably, I hope?" Browne was wondering if Dr. Grant had told her of his decision not to let the book be published. "Oh yes, very favorably." She frowned. "Which reminds me. He received a check from you for the advance royalties. I'm sure he didn't cash it because there was no deposit at the bank that large. I can't find the check anywhere. He must have had it with him when -- " She had opened the screen door. Browne went in and followed her into the study. He looked aroimd at the walls of books, almost feeling the presence of the man whose retreat this had been. "That's what I've come here to see you about," Browne said. "You see, he called on me at my office the morning of the day he vanished." "He did?" "Yes. I'm going to be quite frank with you. He returned the check to me. "Why? He said nothing to me about it." "I rather imagine he didn't have time. I've waited, knowing you wouldn't care to discuss business so soon after -- " He waited for her reaction. When she said nothing he continued. "He returned the check and said he didn't want the book published after all. I couldn't quite understand his reasons, but they are no longer valid as I see it." "What were his reasons? This surprises me very much. Just the day before that he mentioned his book and expressed pleasure that it was being published." "The reasons he gave were that the book contained some things that were -- to use his own words -- a trifle crackpottish. He thought they might reflect on him in some way." "Oh my goodness. He was always doing something like that, Mr. Browne. He leaned over backwards. Scientific integrity was a fetish with him." "I haven't read the book," Mr. Browne said. "The reader reported it was far better than Dr. Grant's first one. That was good enough for me. The reader is no longer with us." He frowned in irritation at the memory. "Left us without giving notice. But he was a good man. Excellent judgment. I'd like to go ahead with the book unless you object." "I don't know," Mrs. Grant hesitated. "If he didn't want it published -- " "But he's gone now," Browne reminded her. "I know, but -- She wept softly into a crumpled kerchief. The publisher remained silent. After a moment she pulled herself together. "He was always so absentminded. I was sure he had mislaid the check. Used it to scribble some problem on. He did that once several years ago." Browne reached into his breastpocket and brought out a long envelope and extended it toward her. "I had another check made out for advance royalties," he said, "if you decide to let me go ahead with the book." "I don't think I should, Mr. Browne." She withdrew the check from the envelope and looked at it, her eyebrows lifting at the size of the figure. "It's substantially more than the original check," Browne said. "I thought perhaps you might be in need of money, and I feel confident the book will sell exceptionally well." "It is a lot of money," Mrs. Grant said. "But I'm so confused. I wish I knew what to do." Browne leaned forward. "Your husband was a great man. I feel it as an obligation on my part to make public his last work." Mrs. Grant nodded slowly. "You may be right. I hadn't thought of it that way." "And you can undoubtedly use the money," Browne added. "There'll be more. How much more depends on how the book sells. It may be a steady income for a few years." "All right," Mrs. Grant said, making up her mind. "I'll let you publish it." "Fine!" Mr. Browne said heartily. "I felt you would. And any time you need money just call me." February. He was seventeen now, and the knowledge filled him with dismay. It had been months since his father had vanished. Or had his father vanished? Maybe his memory of those people vanishing was as wrong as his memory of which way his door opened! To check it he spent an afternoon in a newspaper office searching back papers until he found the accounts. He read them all carefully. They were as he remembered them. And in him, slowly, grew the realization that he was going to use someone. He was going to choose someone and try to make that person disappear. More, he knew that that person was going to be Curt Gaard. He decided against calling and making an appointment. He would go to the man's office and put over the sixteen-year-old act. With a great deal of shyness he confided to the receptionist that Curt was a very special friend of his mother's. She talked into the inter-office phone, did a lot of listening and yessing. Finally she told Fred that Dr. Gaard wanted him to wait a few moments. Then she dialed an outside number. Fred listened to the clicks and knew it was his home phone. The psychiatrist was going to talk to his mother. He hadn't wanted thatj but it wouldn't matter materially. The wait lasted almost half an hour. Then, with heart pounding, Fred was walking toward the dark walnut door to the inner office. Inside, he caught a comprehensive glimpse of the rumored couch, luxurious desk and chairs, thick expensive rug, and an assortment of floorlamps and oil paintings. Then the psychiatrist was upon him, heartily welcoming him. There were time-marking conversational exchanges about school, the hot rod, and life in general. There was the pause while each sized the other up. Then, "I'm glad you dropped in, Fred," Dr. Gaard smiled casually. "I'm all mixed up," Fred said. "I know something's wrong with me. I wanted someone to talk to, now that Dad is gone. I thought of you. I didn't want to bother Mom. Do you really straighten out crazy people?" "Not exactly," Curt chuckled. "A psychologist finds most of his patients among people who are just upset about things. They aren't insane. They just need someone who has experience to help them get their thoughts straightened out." "Maybe that's all I need," Fred said. "I don't think I'm crazy." "( )f course you aren't. You're a very hi .ilthy-minded young man." "I don't want Mom to know al""ii tliis..." I urt frowned, jotted something do'vii on a notepad. It was, Fred guessed, a notation to call his mother and warn her to keep quiet. "Don't worry about your mother. Now tell me, just what seems to be the trouble?" Curt smiled encouragingly. "Are you married?" Fred asked with teen-age frankness. "No," Curt smiled. "Would you marry my mother?" Fred asked bluntly. "I would like for you to be my father." Curt Gaard stared at him a moment. "I really believe you mean that," he said slowly. "You know, don't you, that it will be two years before she can be free to marry? Your father can't be declared legally, ah, departed, for two years." "No. I didn't know," Fred said, real dismay on his face. He hadn't known about that. He thought rapidly. "Then can I come live with you? Just until Mom can marry you?" Inwardly he was enjoying this. And he hoped he wasn't overdoing it. "We can't do that," Curt said. "I'll tell you what we can do, though. I'll invite myself out to dinner tomorrow evening. Don't say anything. I'll surprise your mother. And we'll see a lot of each other from now on. Okay?" Fred nodded. It was definitely okay. He wanted to be present when Curt Gaard disappeared into thin air, and this way he had a chance. H e left Curt's office highly exhilarated, almost drunk with the emotion of things working right. It lasted until the following evening when the doctor showed up and he and Fred's mother put on their little act. Then his emotions swung the other way. He experienced a reluctance to go through with his plans. There was too much that was likeable about the man. And his mother did like him. "Poor Dad," Fred thought. After dinner the next evening, Curt kept the conversation on Fred's father. It was, Fred sensed, the right time to bring up the theory. Curt would do anything to please him, to draw him out. But he hesitated. Stretching elaborately, he said, "I'm sleepy. Why don't you and Mom play Canasta or something?" "I'm going to be much too busy," his mother said. "I have to finish proofreading your father's book for the publisher. Mr. Browne is finally going to print it, and wants it back right away." "When did that happen?" Fred demanded. "Can I read it?" "You can read it when It comes out. Now you and Curt go into the study and leave me alone." She herded them out of the room. This interlude had served to strengthen Fred's resolve. Alone with the psychiatrist, he let slip that he knew of a wonderful theory his father had originated, then tried to cover up. Curt used flattery. Fred took his cue and slyly bragged that it was a theory few college professors could understand even, but he understood it. More coaxing and he was ready to start in. But his conscience got the better of him. He balked, and even as he tried to squirm out of it he realized that it was too late. Dr. Gaard would never rest until the theory had been told. "I'll tell you the next time you come," he suggested as a last retreat. "Tonight," Curt said. "Even if it takes all night. You can miss school tomorrow." He winked. "I can okay it with the teacher." "All right," Fred said in sudden crystalization of decision. "But only if you agree to master every step of it, stopping me until you have." Curt agreed. He started in. After half an hour it settled into serious listening on Curt's part, and pertinent questions that made Fred realize he was dealing with a min'd of more than average keenness. Fred's mother wandered in occasionally, and out again, without being noticed by either of them. An hour passed. Two. The final steps were drawing nearer. At times Curt was even anticipating some of them. It was midnight when it was finished. The mind of Curt Gaard held the entire pattern. Fred couldn't take his eyes oflf the man's face. The face that was mirroring the rapid flow of thoughts as it reviewed and attacked every brick in the structure, finding it solid, and solidly cemented to its neighbors. Then he saw a change come over the man's face. He had accepted the theory. Now he was trying to integrate it into the problem of Fred Grant. He hadn't yet seen the connection between the theory and the mysterious disappearances. And perhaps he wouldn't. If he did he might go the final step and realize what was going to happen to him. Fred hoped that wouldn't #f happen. He didn't want his victim to be conscious of being a victim. "You are intelligent, Fred," Curt probed, "to be able to master such an advanced theory." He glanced at his watch. "It's getting pretty late. I'll tell you what. After school tomorrow drop down to my office. We'll come out for dinner here together." "Say! That'd be swell!" Fred enthused. "I'll get right to bed so I can get enough sleep." He leaped up and called, "Mom! I'm going to bed now." He winked broadly at Curt to let him know he was getting out of his way so they could be alone together a few minutes. And that was that. The dye was cast, and all that remained was to try and use it to make progress, rather than letting it be just another disappearance that pointed to nothing constructive. There was no way of telling how fast it would work. The next afternoon and evening there was little to provide an indication, other than an occasional look that came over. Curt for moments at a time. A date was made for Saturday. It was to be a picnic in the country. That meant skipping Friday. Fred violently objected, but Curt and his mother overrode his objections. So in the end it had to be Saturday, unless Curt disappeared before then. He didn't. B ut ten minutes before school was out Friday a note was brought into the classroom from the principle's office. Curt had called to ask Fred to come to his office directly from school. Tom between excited anticipation that the psychiatrist had made an important discovery, and fear that the man would have vanished before he could get to him, Fred ran from the school building and caught the bus. At Curt's office the receptionist smiled and told him to go right in. His sigh of relief was genuine. Curt was sitting at his desk. "Come in, son," he said. There were the amenities. "Flow did school go today?" "Okay." "Anything happen?" Fred waited impatiently. Then: "I've been thinking a lot about your father's theory, Fred, and I would like to ask a few questions -- if it won't upset you." "Of course not!" Fred said. "Okay, here's a question," Curt said. "Or rather, a statement You can answer yes or no. You believe the theory is at the root of the disappearances, that in some unknown fashion knowing the theory will cause a person to vanish." So there it was. Fred debated rapidly in his mind. It might be better to admit it. "Yes," he said. "Hmm. Then let me ask you this. How do you account for the fact that you know it, and haven't disappeared?" Fred decided to be completely truthful and see what happened. "It's because I don't let belief form a part of my thinking, sir. Dad instilled that in me. With those that disappeared, logic was their groundwork of belief." "But you believe knowing the theory caused them to vanish?" Fred smiled. "I see what you rtiean. No, I don't. It's just that no other alternative seems probable, SO .   "So you work with the one that does," Curt said, nodding. "All right, let's work with it for the moment. You have probably done some thinking on what mechanism might be involved in the process of vanishing. Would you care to tell me about it?" "There's no reason why not, sir. It takes time for conscious beliefs to sink into the subconscious and integrate there. The time varies with the person and the emotions involved." "That makes sense," Curt said, nodding. "I postulated that down underneath even the subconscious, at the very roots of being, is what I named the basic thought matrix. In order for us to be here in this existence at all it must have a certain form. Change that form and, presto, the person slips out of this existence, perhaps into another." "I see." Curt drummed his fingers on the desk for a long minute. "I see," he repeated. "Has it occurred to you that you have already rejected your theory? It's quite obvious you have, you know." "How is it obvious?" Fred asked, wondering what Curt meant. "Because you told me the theory. You wouldn't have, of course, if you believed it would cause me to vanish like the others." Fred opened and closed his mouth several times, unable to cope with this. It was unexpected. "We've gotten to the root of your trouble," Curt went on. "It was a real trouble, to you. In a few months you will look back on it and marvel at it. Right now it seems real. You feel that somewhere your father still exists. You woidd like to go to him, or perhaps bring him back. Believe me, such mysterious vanishings aren't uncommon. The history of the world is full of such incidents. In some cases whole groups have vanished. Authenticated cases. In southeast Asia the people of an entire city of over night. In the last century an entire trainload of people, including the train, vanished while going from one city to another a few miles away. And there have been vanishments with reappearances, too. In England there was an old woman who suddenly vanished before the eyes of her family. At the same instant she reappeared in a room in London, miles away, in front of other people. Did she know your father's theory? Did the train that vanished know that theory?" Curt was smiling. "No. You see, it's something unrelated to your father's theory." Fred was nodding. "You may be right," he said. "I didn't know about those." "You may go now, son," Curt said. "I'll be out around eleven o'clock in the morning." Fred rose quickly. "Okay, Curt," he said. "I'll see you." He hurried out. It was too much of an effort to hide the sudden trembling. He hadn't known about other cases of vanishing. They provided data to expand the whole thing, while not in the slightest detracting from the validity of anything else. And if the talk had been pro!' d much more Curt would have iiH vitably tumbled to his motive for telling him the theory. P romptly at eleven Curt arrived. Fred's mother had already prepared the large basket of food. There were ten minutes of lastminute bustle, then they were off, with Curt skillfully tooling his Cadillac in and out of traffic until they were on the open highway. "I know just the place," he told them. "Woods, meadow, brook. Even a couple of cows." And he did. When they arrived shortly before twelve-thirty it was all that. Fred relaxed as the car came to a stop. Every second of the trip he had been ready to seize the wheel and keep the car from crashing if Curt vanished. ".Still a little nervous?" Curt asked him as they got out. "No. No, of course not!" Fred said. Curt didn't pursue the subject. Instead, he became something utterly different than he had been before, a carefree thoroughly likeFred began to regret that he had ( hosen him as his victim. He began ii hope that the process might not le automatic, that Curt wouldn't v.midi. But he stayed close to him mil lUiencd to his every word and c ln d his face as much as he I I I'oi tillfirst time in years his even joked back at Curt occasionally, something she had never done with Martin in Fred's memory. Her joking was clumsy and uncertain. Fred laughed uproariously to encourage her and to hide his uncomfortable feeling. "Oh, I haven't felt so good in ages," she said when they were seated around the tablecloth spread with sandwiches and salads and cakes. "It's wonderful getting out like this. We'll have to do it often." "We will," Curt said. "At least once a week." Fred's mother picked up a sandwich. She started to raise it to her mouth. She was smiling at Curt and about to say something to him. Both Curt and Fred were watching her. Abruptly she wasn't there. The sandwich seemed to remain stationary for a long second. Then it dropped to the tablecloth. Curt was holding a paper cup filled with hot coffee. His hand consteaming coffee over his legs. Fred stared at the space his mother had just occupied. Abruptly he squawked, "No!" He turned accusing eyes on Curt. "You told her!" Something seemed to go out of the man. He seemed to become visibly smaller. "Yes," he whispered, "I told her." Fred was crying. "But you shouldn't have," he sobbed. "I told you because I wanted you to vanish. I didn't want her to, and now she has. And nothing happened that I could use." Curt blinked at him, absorbing this new bit of information. "You wanted me to vanish?" he echoed. "Yes, I can see that now. I didn't know. It seemed too absurd. I thought you were just imagining things. Yes, I went out while you were at school and spent the whole morning teaching her every step. It was fairly easy. We had planned on coaxing you to explain it to her. Knowing it ahead of time she could pretend to grasp it that much more easily. We were planning on coaxing you into a more social relationship. Actually, she had already read the theory in your father's book she was reading for the publisher." A glassy look came into his eyes. "The book. If the theory is at the root of the disappearances the book shouldn't be published. Yes, by God. That's what your father was driving at. Your mother told me the publisher had told her your father tried to get him not to publish it." "The book has the theory in it?" Fred said. "It mustn't get published. Why -- thousands of people would read it and vanish. We've got to stop them!" Curt was shaking his head in bewilderment. "But we can't be sure. It must be something else, though what I don't know." "No," Fred said bitterly. There was a long silence. Curt broke it by saying, "What did you expect to accomplish by my vanishing?" Fred told him of Horace's shouting to his wife, "Ethel! I've got it!", and the others seeming to have a flash of divination or insight just before they vanished. "I wanted," he explained dully, "to be with you when it happened, in the hopes I could get something more than I have to go on. In that way I might be able to find out something so I could bring my father back. And Mom." He began to cry. "I see," Curt said, calm and a little subdued. "It's possible that may come. After what I've seen happen I can admit it as a possibility." "Then you will make every effort to tell me?" Fred asked. Curt smiled wryly. "You make it sound inevitable. But -- yes, I will." Fred's eyes were large and round. "I've got to find the mechanism. I've got to go where they've vanished to and show them how to get back!" He turned his eyes on Curt. "Don't you hate me?" he pleaded. "Fm just the same as a murderer!" "No, my son," Curt said gently. "Wherever your father is, your mother is with him now. If -- " A startled expression appeared on his face. "So that's it," he almost whispered. "What's it?" Fred asked. "Tell me. Please tell me. I've got to know, you know. You promised!" Curt frowned in a visible effort to jerk himself back. His eyes, holding a faraway look, rested on Fred's face, looked at it, and through it. "You promised!" Fred screamed. "Tell me!" Curt opened his mouth as though to speak. His lips smiled. And -- he was no longer there. Fred was alone, with the picnic lunch on the white square of tablecloth, with the gleaming Cadillac a few yards away, with the two white and black spotted cows grazing a short distance away, with the noisy little brook nearby. Alone... H e became aware of a police siren growing louder. He became aware he was behind a wheel, that there were cars in front of him veering wildly out of his way. The speedometer needle pointed at ninety. How had he arrived here? He took his foot off the gas. He was driving a Cadillac. Curt's. But Curt was gone. That was it! He had started out to look for the police. He pulled over to the side of the road as the police car came screaming up. Shakily he told them about the disappearances. Any doubts they might have had were held in reserve by the obvious sincerity of his grief. He led them back to the picnic grove. The tablecloth with the food on it was still there, untouched. One of the cows was grazing beside it. They listened while he told again of his mother and Curt vanishing before his eyes. Their reserved skepticism was thrust out of their minds when he identified himself as the son of Dr. Martin Grant, who had disappeared. They used their car radio. In a surprisingly short time several other cars were coming through the gate into the pasture. Fred, his mind paralyzed with grief, stood forlornly near the Cadillac. He answered the questions they put to him. He wasn't aware of the news cameras that took shots of him which were to appear in the evening papers all over the country. Eventually it was over. The police gathered up the picnic lunch, his mother's purse, and everything else. A gray-haired man in a dark brown suit who introduced himself as Captain Waters told him to get into the Cadillac. "I'll drive," Waters said. Entirely submissive, Fred obeyed. On the way into town Captain Waters said he would take Fred home if he wanted to go there, but it would be really better if he accepted an invitation to stay at the Waters home for a few days until things were straightened out. "All right," Fred said. Eternities later he was in a house with comfortable furnishings. A motherly old lady was hovering around him. Captain Waters was on the phone caUing someone. There was a steaming dinner on blue design Swedish dishes. Under coaxing Fred nibbled. Door chimes sounded. Captain Waters pushed back his chair and went away. He came back with another gray-haired man who pressed a thumb against Fred's cheek, listened to words Captain Waters was saying, then ordered Fred to roll up his sleeve. He swabbed a spot with alcohol and inserted a hypo needle. Fred watched with listless eyes. "Get him undressed and to bed," the doctor said. "Poor kid. Suffering from shock. Have to watch him the next few days..." Shock... Fred tried to concentrate on the meaning of the word. The bed was an enormous expanse of fresh smelling sheets and luxurious blankets. The pillows were mountainous... and so soft... The sun was streaming in through open French doors, filtered through bronze screen doors. An electric clock on the dresser pointed at eleven. He lay there without moving, remembering everything that had happened the day before. And he had a feeling that, in his sleep, he had been doing a lot of thinking. Or was it dreaming? "Poor boy," a melodious voice purred. He opened his eyes. It was the motherly woman, with a tray of toast and eggs and steaming coffee. The sight of it made him aware that there was a huge emptiness in his stomach. He ate, gratefully. Mrs. Waters busied herself about the room, humming soft tunes, smiling at him whenever he looked at her. When he had finished, she took the tray. "You just relax and sleep some more," she said. "The bathroom is through that door over there. If you want me for anything just call. I'll hear you. And if you want to get up and wander about the house just do so." She departed, leaving the door part way open in invitation. Fred sighed and closed his eyes. In that moment of relaxation the thinking he had done during the night rose into consciousness. For he knew now what he had to do. There was no other avenue of exploration. It might not even be possible. But if it was possible he was going to do it. He was going to vanish. He should have realized it. Once he vanished as had the others, he would have experience with the mystery. Personal experience. He would have all the data he required, instead of just data from the world he was in. If he had the ability to solve the problem of reappearance he would then be able to return, and go back again and show the others how to return. The key to vanishing was belief, that quality of thought which his father had systematically weeded from his mind since earliest infancy. It might take time to overcome that, but it should be possible. Already he believed some things. Or did he? Was it merely a realization that those things had a probability that approached certainty? His patterns of thinking were too ingrained. His mind was too well integrated. If he became irritated the irritation immediately brought up the memories of the factors that made him react that way. If he became happy he consciously knew the pattern, stretching back to early infancy. It was ingrained within him. He began to realize with a sinking sensation that he didn't actually know what belief was. If, in some way, it was present anywhere in his makeup, he didn't know how to recognize it. His mental pattern was one of unbelief. Not disbelief, the believing that something isn't true; but unbelief, the using of something in the pragmatic sense for its workability. He let his thoughts wander in the past. He could remember vaguely a moment when he had felt unreasoning terror, a sense of being lost. He could remember his father saying many times, "Belief is the lazy assuming that something is true. It is or it isn't, and the fundamental postulate of inductive logic tells us that its truth or lack of it is forever beyond our reach. So why reach for it? Use a theory if it works for you. Discard it if it doesn't. Don't use it even to the point of absurdity while clinging to a belief that it's true. It was that way with facts, too. Something that happened or seemed to happen, needed no tag of belief attached to it. If you saw it happen it didn't necessarily happen. There was such a thing as illusion. Accept it as though it had happened -- until events pointed otherwise. His playmates and teachers had been frankly skeptical of this point of view, doubting he could actually have attained it. They were quick to agree it was desirable. They just thought no one could use a thing without attaching a degree of belief or unbelief to it. Now, what should he believe? As in the attempts to reach the basic matrix by conscious extension, he had to start somewhere. It was midaftemoon when Captain Waters entered the bedroom with a cheery, "Hello!" "Hi," Fred said. He had been lying in bed with his eyes closed. "Did I wake you?" Waters said. "Sorry." He grinned. "You can go back to sleep again. I'll drop in later." Captain Waters ducked out. He started to close the door, then left it open. A few minutes later the rumble of his voice came from another part of the house. Fred tried to catch what he was saying, but couldn't. Half an hour later he heard the front door chimes. The rumble of deep voices came again. The doctor appeared in the doorway. "Well, well," he said, smiling. "I hear you had a very restful night. How do you feel today? Better?" He was advancing toward the bed as he talked. Setting his black bag down, he reached out and took Fred's pulse. "A little rapid," he said, putting his watch away. Reaching inside his coat, he took out a thermometer. He put it imder Fred's tongue. "Had anything to eat or drink in the past fifteen minutes?" he asked. Fred shook his head. The doctor stood quietly. After a while he lifted the thermometer, glanced at it, and put it away. "Looks like you're going to be fit as a fiddle," he said. "I'll be back in a few minutes. Mrs. Waters told me on the way in she was pouring me a cup of coffee." Fred remained motionless until, the doctor had left the room. Then he slipped out of bed and went to the door. On the other side of it was a living room. A swinging door of the type that opens into kitchens was just swinging closed. No one was in sight. Quickly Fred stole across to the door. He put his ear close to it and listened. "Dr. Harvey speaking," he heard the doctor say. "Connect me with thirteen please." "Is he going to be all right?" Mrs. Waters' anxious voice sounded. "I think so," the doctor said calmly. "Hello? Thirteen? Who's speaking? Oh, hello, Giles. Dr. Harvey. Do you have a vacancy? Observation, yes." "Oh dear," Mrs. Waters said unhappily. "It will be for the best," Captain Waters said. "They'll know how to take care of him." Fred waited for no more. He went back to the bedroom. His clothes were in the closet. In seconds he had them on. He could tie his shoes and button up later. He unfastened one of the screen doors and stepped out onto a flagstone path that wound around the comer of the house toward the front. There were people on the sidewalk, but none very near. It would be hours before dark, and there was no place to hide. There were two cars parked at the curb. One was a police car, the other a black Chrysler sedan, probably the doctor's car. The police car had the key in the ignition. Fred didn't hesitate. He jerked open the door and slid behind the wheel. Mrs. Waters' anxious voice sounded, calling, "Fred! Where are you?" Then the starter was whirring. The motor caught. As he shot away from the curb, Fred caught a glimpse in the rear view mirror of Captain Waters mnning down the walk from the house. As he took the first comer, touching the siren button briefly, he wondered why he had run. It had been an impulse. Maybe it was the wrong one. Maybe he could accomplish what he had to do better in some kind of institution. Maybe not. He compressed his lips grimly. The die was cast now. He would abandon the police car someplace, then slip quietly out of town on foot. He would be caught if he tried to go home. He had no money except a few dollars in change. Maybe this was all part of the new pattern that seemed to possess him. He kept the siren going, not trusting his ability to avoid traffic. Its mad scream blended into his thoughts. He was the hunted. He was sane, but the truth would brand him as insane. Or was he sane? Had anyone vanished? Was his father at home, sitting in his chair in his study, expounding his theories to his colleagues? Was his mother at home, in the kitchen, preparing dinner? His lip trembled. Homesickness welled up in him. He was near a bus line that went to the outskirts of the city. He shut off the siren and slowed down. After a few blocks and two turns he felt safe in ditching the car. He pulled quietly to the curb. He tied his shoelaces, buttoned his shirt, combed his hair. Then he got out. No one paid any attention to him. He walked to the corner. Two minutes later the bus stopped. T he night sky was clear. The moon was a lesser sun whose light made things visible and somehow unreal and mysterious. In the ditch to the right of the road two bright points of light blinked on, held for a moment, and vanished. A cat. A silent dog appeared out of the gloom, wagged its tail and half of its body in friendliness. "Nice doggy," Fred said nervously. It sniffed his trouser leg, lost interest, and moved off into the darkness. It was after midnight. How long after, he didn't know. Once a police car had come speeding by, its red lights ogling insanely, its spotlight weaving into the bushes at the side of the road. He had lain very still in the ditch until it passed. It hadn't slowed down. Later it had come back and he had again pressed his body into the earth beside the road. Off to the right now he saw the silhouette of the giant tree that had been the landmark of the picnic spot. A few minutes later he could see the gate that led to the meadow. He squeezed through it and picked out the path worn by the cars the day before. Some winged creature dipped down, shied away from him, and swept off into the darkness. A soft gurgling sound became audible. The brook. The spot where his mother and Curt had vanished, was ahead. He reached it. He vVasn't quite sure until he studied the ground and went back in memory to check on little details. Then he was certain. He had reached his goal. He knew why he had come, of course. Here he was closer to his mother than anyplace else. Here, in some unguessed way, he might get to her. What would he do when morning came? He sat down and pulled his knees up under his chin, wrapping his arms around them. Morning was far away. It might never come -- for him. If and when it did he would cope with it. "Mom," he whispered. "Mom... Crrroak! The sound of the frog broke the silence. The croak of a frog that was part of the universe -- the universe that was basically illogical. More... i Fred sobbed. The universe was Insane. Police looking for you. Doctors with their standards of sanity and insanity. Right now they were looking for him to protect him from himself. They didn't want to know why things were done. To them even the reason would be part of the insanity. They dealt in tags. Words. Their science was an illusion within an illusion. Meaningless inside a universe of meaninglessness. Crrroak, the frog said cautiously. And a night creature came down on silent wings, to weave back into the darkness. That was the reason for pragmatism. He could see it now. He had always thought his father made pragmatism his God because it was the intellectual thing to do. But now he could see the reason for it. Reality was a jungle in which Reason had to cope with Unreason, and there was no criterion except workability. Belief was an instinctive way of thought. It was like the appendix. Scientists claimed that long ago man ate tree bark. And the appendix had had a use. If so, that use was gone, but the appendix remained. Before surgery had become a common thing, thousands of people died from appendicitis. The organ that had once been necessary had become a hazard to living. Belief was something like that. He jerked out of his thoughts to listen to a car on the road. It slowed down. It stopped by the gate. A car door slammed. A man appeared briefly in the light of the headlamps. Captain Waters -- alone. He loomed a moment later inside the pasture in the light of a flashlight. He occasionally flashed it on his face so he would be recognizable. Fred felt an impulse to slip away into the darkness. He hadn't been seen. Captain Waters was just hoping he might be here. A stronger impulse made him remain as he was. The entire pattern of Captain Waters' approach indicated understanding -- or at least The bobbing flashlight came closer. It speared out and touched him; then abruptly went out. Footsteps approached. A dark form emerged from the gloom. "Hello, Fred," Captain Waters said quietly. "I came to keep you company. I'll just sit quiet and not bother you." "Okay," Fred said. T here were movements. A small flame illuminated Captain Waters' features as he lit his pipe. The flame went out. Then, only the occasional glow of the pipe, briefly illuminating the police Captain's face. Crrroak! The frog greeted this newest arrival in his domain. Fred could not think. He was too conscious of the man sitting near him. He fought down the impulse to jump up and run away into the darkness. He fought the desire to scream at the man to leave him alone. Perhaps the police captain sensed this, or perhaps he could see Fred's expression when the coal in his pipe glowed brightest. "Tell you what," he said suddenly, "You maybe would feel better alone. I'll wait in the car. When you get ready you can come home. No more doctors. Mom gave me a good talking to. She wants you to come back." Waters got up and walked away into the night. Minutes later there was the sound of a car door slamming shut. Fred was alone again. Alone. It was a feeling, almost an emotion. Intellectually he knew that nearby was a frog. A block away across the meadow was the police captain sitting in his car. Abruptly, without warning, a flash of insight spread through his entire mind. He knew suddenly what belief was. He knew it instinctively and without question. And knowing it, he knew that his foundations of unbelief were a semantic illusion that had been built up within him. The panorama of his mind, his entire life, stood clearly before him. The cute little tags of probability were superficial. They had a pragmatic value in keeping the mind open, but their function was to guide the judgment in tagging thoughts with belief or disbelief. He retreated into his aloneness until there was nothing but himself. He marveled at the unfoldment of this new understanding. He could see things in this new light of understanding. But then... A question loomed. If that were so, why hadn't he vanished like the others? Belief was an automatic process. Why hadn't it permeated to the basic matrix of his mind as it had with the others? Was he, then, still on the wrong track? But there was no other! He saw the trap he had set for himself. He had believed with all his being that belief was the key he was searching for! He had been on the wrong track. His beautiful theory of belief that spread downward into the subconscious, then down lower and lower into the basic matrix that held a person in this reality, was wrong. The evidence he had based it on was still there, but it was evidence of something else. Of what? The eastern horizon was suffused with light. It grew stronger, dimming the light of the moon. From somewhere in the depths of his being rose a feeling that soon he would know, and when he did he would be close to crossing the threshold. He unclasped his arms and straightened out his legs, feeling stabs of pain in his weary muscles. He got to his feet, tingling with weariness. By the side of the road, he could .see the police car he had stolen -- infinite ages ago. He walked toward it, and when he reached it he rlimbed in and closed the door. "Beautiful morning," Captain Waters said, starting the motor. F red awoke and opened his eyes. Across the room the !'t #-#I doors were open. Sunlight w.is lilti-ring through the copper scK-i-iis. A breeze was playing gently #I '.hi, tillIniig walk into the counii v, his rendezvous with Aloneness, (l.ipi.iin Wain's coming to bring him li.ii k, all seemed the stuff of dreams. He had the feeling that he had never left this enormous bed. Then it returned. Reality. The miracle of his reorientation to belief, the new vistas that went with it. The full realization of the true nature of the vanishments. He became aware of a figure in the doorway, watching him. It was Mrs. Waters. "Awake?" she asked cheerfully. "Yes," Fred said. "Want some breakfast?" He nodded. She went away. He raised his head and looked about the room, at the homey touches, the family pictures on the dresser and the walls, the hand sewed knickknacks and frills. This was probably the Waters' own bedroom that they had given up for him. He could vanish while Mrs. Waters was away. She would come in with the breakfast tray and find him gone. When would the moment of reorientation come? He frowned in thought. That had' stirred up something about what he had dreamed, or thought, while he was asleep. Something diat had the flavor of being very important. "Here you are!" Mrs. Waters said, sweeping into the room with the tray and its Swedish design dishes and steaming coffee and hot cereal. As she bent over to set the tray on the bed, there came the sound of the front door opening. "There's Pa, home already," She smiled worriedly at Fred. "Will you be all right? I'll tell Pa to come in and keep you company while I fix his supper." "Yes ma'am," Fred said, eyeing the food hungrily. "Only -- " She was at the door. She stopped and looked around questioningly. "I -- I think I'd like to be alone while I eat." "All right," she said, and hurried away. But Captain Waters had brushed in without giving her a chance to tell him to stay away. "Hello, son," he said warmly. "Have a good sleep?" Mrs. Waters said, "You let him alone while he eats." "It's all right," Fred said hastily. "Sure it's all right," the police captain said. He sat down and took out his pipe. He concerned himself nothing. Fred picked up a piece of golden toast and bit into one corner absently. The thoughts he had had during sleep were filtering into consciousness. He recalled how his mother had looked. There had been a fleeting expression just before she had vanished. She had been going to say something. She had changed her mind and had vanished instead! And Curt -- he had had his reorientation at least several seconds before vanishing. He had had it, and then, with his new perspective, had said, "So that's it!" It was as though the new orientation made everything else unimportant. One common factor stood out in every case, those two he had personally witnessed, and the others he hadn't seen. One common factor. Vanishing, or whatever happened that produced the vanishing, had been an impulse. There had been time for thought. For example. Curt might have considered the practicality of telling Fred what had happened to him. But he might have reflected that eventually Fred would discover what he had just discovered, so why bother? In the office Curt had told him vanishing, leaving empty houses and streets. Had the cause been the same? A true orientation? Fred looked at Captain Waters, sitting quietly, puffing slowly on his pij)e. With deliberation Waters uncrossed his legs and leaned forward. "You know, son, when you get around to it -- that is, if you feel up to it sometime -- I wish you'd tell me about it. What it is that's troubling you. I'll try to understand." "You'll try -- ?" Fred echoed. And the police captain's words started a train of thought. The others -- had the place they'd gone been a heaven or a hell? So many of them -- . Fred started suddenly. "The book!" he cried. "What book?" "I've got to see the publisher about my father's book. It's very important." "It can wait until you're feeling better," Waters said. "No. I've got to see Mr. Browne!" "Why?" "I -- I can't tell you." "All right." Captain Waters gave in. "I'll take you down and bring you back." It was half an hour later, in the reception room at the publishing company. Fred stared numbly at the big poster on the wall advertising his father's book. "Mr. Browne will see you," the receptionist said. "Wait here," Fred told Captain Waters. "I want to talk to him alone." He went to the door and opened it, stepping inside and closing it behind him. "Fred Grant?" Browne said, getting up from his desk and coming toward him, hand outstretched. "What can I do for you? Need some money?" Fred was shaking his head. "I don't want any money," he said. "I want you to stop my father's book. You can't publish it." "Now wait," Browne said. "We aren't going through that again, are we?" "You can't!" Fred said. "People will read it and vanish!" "Huh?" "People will read it and vanish! You've got to believe me. The cause of those disappearances is in that book!" Browne stared for a moment, then dragged over a notepad, wondering how his publicity boys had missed this one. He stood up and came around his desk. "You leave it to me," he said. "You won't have a thing to worry about. I'll take care of everything." "Then you won't publish it?" Browne was guiding him toward the door. "You leave it to me. Drop in again soon. If you need money just drop in any time and I'll fix you up." Fred found himself outside the door, not quite sure what Mr. Browne had promised. Inside, Browne went back to his Have to tell Nichols about it tomorrow at lunch. That vanishing stuff is a terrific publicity angle." "You still don't want to tell me what's troubling you?" Police Captain Waters said wistfully. A frown crossed Fred's features and vanished into a smile. "Nothing's troubling me," he lied. "I'm all right. I'll be all right." "You'll stay with us a while longer?" "Sure. Sure. You make me feel -- okay. I'm just going out for a ride. Be back for supper." since his mother and Curt had vanished. In that two months he had come to realize something. He didn't quite know how to express it even in his thoughts. It wasn't that he didn't want to vanish. He would, some day. But he had given up trying. It was the wrong way. The others hadn't tried. It had just come to them out of a clear sky. Some day it would come to him that way, and he would welcome it. He drove downtown and parked. A block away was a show he wanted to see. He started toward it. Abruptly he stopped. In front of him was a bookstore. In its window was a large display, and every book had his father's picture on the In back of the display was a large poster with a still larger picture, Anger flamed in Fred's mind. The anger died as abruptly as it had come. It was replaced by a homesickness, a longing. Unconsciously his footsteps carried him into the store. A man had the book in his hands. "You aren't going to buy that, George," the woman beside him was saying. "And why not?" the man asked, laughing. "I've never turned down a dare in my life!" He looked at the girl waiting on him. "Do you think I'll vanish. Miss?" The clerk smiled. "I wouldn't know. I have strict orders not to read the book." A solemn-faced man appeared out of nowhere and thrust a copy of the book at the clerk. "I want this, please," he said. "I'll be with you in a moment, sir," the clerk said. Others were waiting also. Fred stumbled from the store, bpmping into someone in the doorway as he went through, and too confused and fritened to stop and apologize. There was no way of stopping it. Maybe the police would become alarmed at the disappearances. "What's wrong with me?" he mumbled, walking blindly in the crowds on the sidewalks. "Maybe I do lack the ability to believe. I think I believe. What have I missed?" Only he, of all those who had learned the theory, had not vanished. Was faith, then, something so common, and yet impossible for he, himself, to reach? Ahead was another bookstore. In its windows were the same displays. He stopped. People were pushing through the doors. Inside they were picking up the book and looking for a clerk. The clerks were smiling and saying things Fred couldn't hear, and wrapping the books and handing them to their new owners -- people who would take them home and read -- and vanish. Into what? Something they would see, and smile at, and say, "Why, of course!" And with a simple acceptance they would enter it. He watched them. And from the depths of his being Fred longed to be one of them; to be able to go in and buy the book, and read it, and... On the other side of the window, in the store, a clerk was waiting on a customer. The customer turned to look at him, with his nose flattened against the glass. He didn't see them. In his eyes was a faraway look, a startled light. "Why of course!" he said in quiet wonder. There was just a little blur, where a nose had pressed against the window, and the customer frowned and said to the clerk, "That yotmg man outside -- he -- he -- " "Three-fifty, please," the clerk said. "Ah -- oh. Oh, sure." What is to be will be. Our only refuge lies in that which might not have been. By Robert Turner December #th, #, Two-Thirty A.M. was like actual physical pressure against his tightly squinched eyes. He tried to burrow deeper into the protectively warm, cave-like place where he'd been safe from them for so long. But he couldn't escape them. Their hands, their big, red, hideously smooth hands had him, now. They were tugging and pulling at him with a strength impossible to fight. Still he struggled. He tried to cry out but there was no sound from his constricted throat. There were only the frightening noises from outside, louder, now. He tried to twist and squirm against the hands dragging him toward that harsh, blinding light. He was too small, too weak, compared to them. He couldn't fight them off. He felt himself being stretched and strained and forced with cruel determination. He didn't want to go out there. He knew what was waiting for him out there. He couldn't go. Not out there, where... When Jeff McKinney was three years old he tipped a pot of scalding water from the stove onto himself. He was badly burned and scarred. He hovered between life and death for several weeks. JefFs father was out of work at the time and they were living in a cold water tenement. Something about the case caught a tabloid's attention and it was played up as a human interest sob story. It came to the attention of a wealthy man who volunteered to pay for plastic surgery. Then followed, long months of that kind of torture, but Jeff McKinney came out of it not too badly scarred. Not on the surface, anyhow. But his face had a strange hue. There was a frozen, mask-like cast to his features when he smiled. He was eight when he saw his father killed. He was in the taxi the older McKinney now drove for a living when the father stepped out of the driver's side onto a busy street without looking back first. The speeding truck took the car door and JefFs father with it for half a block, wedged between front wheel and fender. Jeff never forgot the sound of that, and the screaming. Nor his shock when he suddenly realized that the screams were his own. Jeff was a strange boy. He didn't have an average childhood. The poverty was more extreme after his father's death. He stayed home alone while his mother was out working at whatever job she could get, reading too much and thinking too much. Once, he looked at her with haunted eyes and said: "Mother, why is life so bad? Why are people even bom into a world like this?" What could she say to a question like that? She said: "Please, Jefferson! Please don't talk that way. Life isn't all bad. You'll see. Some day, in spite of everything, you'll be somebody and you'll be happy. The good times will come." They did, of course. A few of them. There was the day he went upstate on an outing for underprivileged boys and went fishing for the first time. He caught a whopping trout and won a prize for it That was nice; that was fun. That was when he was thirteen. That was the year the gang of kids caught him on the way home from school and beat him unconscious because he never laughed; because they couldn't make him laugh. The year before his mother died. At the orphanage he didn't mingle much with the other boys. He spent most of his after-classes hours alone in the school's chemistry lab. He liked to tinker with chemicals. They were cold, emotionless, immune to joy and sadness, yet they had purpose. He played the cello, too, with haunting beauty, but not in the school band, only when he wanted to, when nobody was around and he could really feel the music. Once, on the way home from his cello lesson in the music building, he saw some boys playing football on the orphanage athletic field. He was suddenly seized with a fierce determination to belong, to grab at some of the shouting, laughing happiness these boys seemed to have. He told them he wanted to join in and play, too. He didn't understand why they laughed so at this idea. They stopped laughing, though, after the first time he ran with the ball, and they all piled up on him and he didn't get up. He lay there, looking so ghostly and breaking so harshly and with the trickle of blood coming out of his ears. But Jeff didn't know they had stopped laughing. He recovered from that skull fracture, all right. Worse, though, than any of the unhappiness he suffered during his life, worse even than the shocks of his father's and mother's deaths, was the thing that happened to him when he was twenty and working at the laboratories of a big drug company. He met and fell hopelessly in love with a girl named Nina, a girl a few years older than he was. They married and for the first few weeks Jeff McKinney had happiness he'd neve'r known before. Until he came home from work sick, one afternoon and saw Nina with the man from the apartment over them. She didn't whine and beg for forgiveness, Nina didn't. She stood boldly while the other man laughed and laughed and she screamed invective upon Jefferson McKinney, telling him what she really thought of him, a gloomy, puny weakling who couldn't even make a decent living, telling him that she was through with him. A blank spot came into JefPs life right them. When it was over, Nina and the other man were on the floor and there was blood on the kitchen carving knife in Jeff's hand. They didn't find him for awhile. He changed his name and appearance and hid in the soiled seams and ragged fringes of society. He learned the anaesthetic powers of drugs and alcohol. He gave up trying to get anything out of this life. Then they finally picked him up, fished him from the river into which he'd jumped. There were days of torture after that, without the alcohol and drugs his wrecked system craved. Right there was the final hell that could have broken him completely. But it didn't. It was like the terrible crisis after a long illness. Things began to get better, to go to the other extreme after that. A state psychiatrist brought Jeff's case to the attention of a noted criminal lawyer. Neither Nina nor her lover had died from their knife wounds. On the plea of the unwritten law, Jeff McKinney got off with a suspended sentence. The lawyer and psychiatrist learned of his interest and knotvledge and talent for chemistry and got him another job in the experimental laboratory of a big university. Later he married a girl named Elaine, who worked at the lab with him. They had two children, and lived in a small comfortable cottage just off the University campus. For several years, they had all they wanted of life -- comfort, health, happiness. Jeff thought that life could never be more wonderful. All of his former, bitter, cynical views fell away from him. Hadn't he, with all odds against him, finally won out and acquired peace and contentment and a purpose in life? What was wrong with a world in which that could happen? Then there was the topper. Jefferson McKinney discovered a new drug which would cure and eventually eliminate a disease that was one of the world's worst killers, the drug for which thousands of scientists had been seeking for years. He was feted and honored, became a national hero. The story of his life and his discovery temporarily pushed even the doleful forecasts of an early Third War, the Big War, off the front pages. And Jeff was humbly proud and grateful that he had paid now the debt he owed to a society that could make a final victory, like his, possible. In a zenith of almost holy happiness, he stood one evening on a lecture platform in a huge auditorium in a great city, before thousands of worshipping people to make a thank-you speech after being awarded a world prize for his great scientific discovery. ( Continued on page # ) 's i 'i mm The Arrow lanced down out of the night like a spear of flame, vengeful and deadly. The legends of Jaq Merril are legion -- but legends. Hark, ye, then to the true story of the pirate benefactor. oj Mankindl By Alfred Coppel breed, unique in the Universe. Of all the races met among the stars, only homo sapiens thrives on deliberate self-delusion. Perhaps this is the secret of our greatness, for we are great. In power, if not in supernal wisdom. Legends, I think, are our strength. If one day a man stands on the rim of the Galaxy and looks out across the gulfs toward the seetee suns of Andromeda, it will be legends that drove him there. They are odd things, these legends, peopled with unreal creatures, magnificent heroes and despicable villains. We stand for no nonsense where our mythology is concerned. A man becoming part of our folk-lore becomes a fey, onedimensional, shadow-image of reality. Jaq Merril -- the Jaq Merril of the history books -- is such an image. History, folklore's jade, has daubed Merril with the rouge of myth, and it does not become him. The Peacemaker, the chronicles have named him, and that at least, is accurate in point of fact. But it was not through choice that he became the Peacemaker; and when his Peace descended over the worlds of space, Merril, the man, was finished. This I know, for I rode with him -- his lieutenant in a dozen and more bloody fights that earned him his ironically pacific laurels. Not many now living will remember the Wall Decade. History, ever pliable, is rewritten often, and facts are forgotten. When it was gone, the Wall Decade was remembered with shame and so was expunged from the record of time. But I remember it well. It was an era compounded of stupidity and grimy political maneuver. We, the greedy men of space -- and that includes Jaq Merril -- saw it end with sorrow in our hearts, knowing that we had killed it. If you will think back to the years immediately preceding the Age of Space, you may remember the Iron Curtain. Among the nations of the Earth a great schism had arisen, and a wall of ideas was built between east and west. Hydrogen bombs were stockpiled and armies marched and countermarched threateningly. Men lived with fear and hatred and distrust. Then, suddenly, came the years of spaceflight and the expanding frontiers. Luna was passed. Mars and Venus and the Jovian Moons felt the tread of living beings for the first time since the dawn of time. The larger asteroids were taken and even the cold moonlets of Saturn and Uranus trembled under the blast of Terran rockets. But the Iron Curtain still existed. It was extended out into the guK of space, an intangible wall of fear and suspicion. Thus was born the Wall Decade. Jaq Merril was made for that epoch. Ever in human history thereare those who profit from the stupidity of their fellows. Jaq Merril so profited. He dredged up the riches of space and took them for his own. And his weapon was man's fear of hb brothers. from the Terran settlement at Canalopolis, that Merril's plan was born. His ship, the Arrow, stood on the red sands of Syrtis Major, waiting for a payload to the Outer System. It stood among a good many like it: the Moonmaid, the Gay Lady, the Argonaut, and my own vessel, the Starhound. We, the captains, had gathered in the Spaceman's Rest -- a tinkling gin-mill peopled with human wrecks and hungry-eyed, dustyskinned women who had come out to Mars hoping for riches and had found only the same squalor they had left behind. I remember the look in Merril's eyes as he spoke of the treasures of space that would never be ours, of the gold and sapphires, the rubies and unearthly gems of fragile beauty and great price. All the riches of the worlds of space, passing through our hands and into the vaults of the stay-athomes who owned our ships and our very lives. It seemed to me that Merril suffered as though from physical pain as he spoke of riches. He was nothing if not rapacious. Greedy, venal, ruthless. All of that. "Five of us," he said in a hard voice, "Captains all -- with ships and men. We carry the riches of the universe and let it slip through our fingers. What greater fools could there be?" Oh, he was right enough. We had the power to command in our hands without the sense to grasp it firmly and take what we chose. "And mark you, my friends," Merril said, "A wall has been buUt around Mars. A wall that weakens rather than strengthens. A wonderful, stupid, wall..." He laughed and glanced around the table at our faces, flushed with wine and greed. "With all space full of walk," he said softly, "Who could unite against us?" The question struck home. I thought of the five ships standing out diere on the rusty desert across the silted canal. Five tall ships -- against the stars. We felt no kinship to those at home who clung to creature comforts while we bucketed among the stars risking our lives and more. We, the spacemen, had become a race apart from that of the home planet. And Merril saw this in our faces that night so long ago, and he knew that he had spoken our thoughts. Thus was bom the Compact. Gods of space, but I must laugh when I read what history has recorded of the Compact. "Merril, filled with the wonder of his great dream, spoke his mind to the Captains. He told them of the sorrow in his heart for his divided fellow men, and his face grew stern when he urged them to put aside ideology and prejudice and join with him in the Compact." So speaks Quintus Bland, historian of the Age of Space. I imagine that I hear Merril's laughter even as I write. Oh, we put aside ideology and prejudice, all right! That night in Yakki the five Captains clasped hands over the formation of the first and only compact of space-piracy in history! ture. Our crews were told nothing, but their pockets were emptied and their pittances joined with ours. We loaded the five ships with supplies and thundered off into the cobalt Martian sky to seek a stronghold. We found one readily enough. The chronicles do not record it accurately. They say that the fleet of the Compact based itself on Eros. This is incorrect. We wanted no Base that would bring us so close to the home planet every year. The asteroid we chose was nameless, and remained so. We spoke of it seldom aspace, but it was ever in our minds. There was no space Wall, there to divide us one from the other. It was a fortress against the rest of mankind, and in it we were brothers. When we struck for the first time, it was not at a Russian missile post as the histories say. It was at the Queen of Heaven, an undefended and unsuspecting merchantman. The records of Earth say the Queen was lost in space between Uranus and Mars, and this is so. But she was listed lost only because no RusMan or American patrol found her gutted hulk. I imagine that at this very moment she hangs out beyond Pluto, rounding the bend of the long ellipse we sent her on that day we stripped her bones. She carried gold and precious stones -- and more important yet, women being furloughed home after forced labor in the mines of Soviet Umbriel. The Starhound and the Arrow bracketed her a million miles above the plane of the ecliptic near Saturn's orbit, and killed her. We drew abreast of her and forced her valves. We boarded her and took what we chose. Then we slaughtered her men and sent them on their long voyage. That was the beginning. The attack against Corfu was our next move. This is the battle that Celia Witmar Day has described in verse. Very bad verse. "Corfu slumbered, gorged and proud -- While Arrow, Hound and Maid marshalled Freedom's might above the tyrant's ground. And rained down death -- " There is much more, of course. Brave phrases of emotion and fanciful unreality written by one who never saw the night of space agleam with stars. There was no talk of tyranny or liberty aboard the Hound that day we leveled with the Maid and the Arrow a thousand miles over the Russian base of Corfu. There was talk of the bullion stored under the fortress' turrets. Merril's face appeared in my visor screen, superimposed on the image of the grimy little asteroid floating darkly against the starfields. "Their radar has picked us up by now, and they're wondering who we are," he said, "Take the Hound out on tangent left and join the Maid. Cover my attack and stand by to put a landing party aground." I watched the image of the Arrow -- a. sliver of darkness against the crescent of Corfu -- lancing down at the fortress. Her forward tubes were glowing with the familiar pre-discharge emanation. Below us, confusion reigned. For the first time in memory an asteroid Base was under attack. Merril brought the Arrow in to within fifty miles and then unleashed the fury of his forward tubes. Hellfire coruscated over the steel turrets and stone walls of Corfu. It splashed like a liquid flame over men arid metal and twisted the towers and buttresses into spidery tendrils of glowing thread. Corfu died without firing a shot. We put a party from the Hound aground ten hours later. Even then, we had to wear insulated suits to walk in that still molten inferno. Charred bodies had become one with the stuff of the fortress, and nothing living was left within the keep. We looted Corfu's treasure and lifted into space heavy with gold. j Time passed in an orgy of looting for the men of the Compact. We grew rich and arrogant, for in space we were kings. Tom by suspicion of one another, America and Russia could do nothing against us. They had built an Iron Curtain in space, and it kept them divided and weak. Endymion felt our blasts, and Clio. Then came Tethys, Rhea, lapetus. We cared nothing for the flag these Bases flew. They were the gathering points for all the gold and treasure of space and we of the Compact took what we wished of it, leaving a trail of blood and rapine behind us. No nation claimed our loyalty; space was our mother and lust our father. Thus, the Peacemakers. F or five full years -- the long years of the Outer Belt -- the Arrow, the Starhound, the Moonmaid, the Lady and the Argonaut were the scourges of the spacelanes. No patrol could find us, and no defense could contain us. I recall how we laughed at the angry sputtering of Earth's radio. Vast sums were spent in searches and new weapons to protect the meek and Ae mutually distrustful from Merril and the men of the Compact. Budgets, already strained to the breaking point by generations of the cold war, creaked and groaned as Russians and Americans spent furiously to build up their defenses against our depredations. But though we were few and they many -- space was large and it hid us well. And then one darkling day, Jaq Merril and I stood on the thin methane snow that carpeted our Base's landing ramp, waiting under our own blue-black sky for the return of the Argonaut. Merril had sent her sunward to strike at the mines of Loki, an asteroid where Russian komisars rolled in mountains of blood-red rubies. We waited through the day and into the sable night, but the Argonaut did not return. For the first time since the formation of the Compact, we had lost a ship, and something like unease crept into our hearts. The carousal that night had no gaiety, and there was the sound of bereaved women weeping. Merril could learn nothing of the Argonaut's fate. It was as though she had dropped through a hole in the fabric of space itself and vanished from the ken of men. To me he said: "I fear a new weapon." But to the rest, he kept his peace and let the work of the Compact continue. There was nothing else to be done. Our Wall Decade was waning, and when a man or a Compact outlives the age that gave him or it birth, there is nothing to do but go forward and meet the new day dawning. So it was with the Compact. We lived on as we had lived before: wealth of space into our coffers. But in the back of our minds a shadow was lurking. On the next raid, the Lady was lost. I saw it happen, as did Merril. There was nothing we could do to into the void as she ruptured in her last agony. It was off Hyperion, whence we had come to loot the trove built there by the prospectors of the Saturnian Moons. And it was a trap. The Arrow, the Hound and the Lady circled the moonlet, swinging inward to the attack. It was the Lady who was to put aground the raiding party, and her valves hung open while men readied the assaultboats. Our radar screens showed nothing of danger. There was only the bloated giant in the sky, a ringed monster of yellow gold against the starry velvet of space. The Lady dropped her boats, the Hound and the Arrow hovering by to watch over their sister. And suddenly, the jagged moonscape below erupted -- belching streaks of fire that sought us like probing fingers. I knew in one single instant of terror that this was the new weapon that had killed the Argonaut, for it sliced into the Lady's flanks as though the steelite hull were cheese. She bulged, glowing like an ember. There was a sudden nimbus of snow about her as her air escaped and froze, and then she rolled into her death-dance, open from bow into the void. The Arrow and the Hound drove off into space like furies leaving the spinning body of their sister ship behind, not waiting to watch her crash down onto the rocky face of Hyperion. And now the five of the Compact were only three, and again there was the sound of weeping among our women. gagement, a single assault-boat returned to Base. It was the lone survivor of the Lady's landing party. By some miracle, the three men aboard had escaped the holocaust. They had landed and been captured and then they had fought their way free and into the void once more. They were half-dead from starvation and exposure, but they had brought word to Merril that the wall that had so long protected us was crumbling. Merril sought me out, his lean hard face grim and set. "There was a Russian among the Americans on Hyperion," he said. "A prisoner?" It was my hope that spoke so, not my sure knowledge of what was to come. Merril shook his head slowly. "A technician. They developed the beam that killed the Argonaut and the Lady -- together." His voice was harsh and bleak. Then suddenly he laughed. "We've touched them," he said, "Touched them on their tender spot -- their purses." He bowed low, filled with bitter mockery. "Behold the diplomats, the men who are accomplishing the impossible!" And I knew that his words spelt doom. Doom for the Compact and for the Wall Decade that was our life. Yet we did not stint. In that year we raided Dione, lo, Gannymede, and even the American naval Base on Callisto. We gutted six Russian and four American rockets filled with treasure. And we ventured sunward as far as the moons of ' Mars. We dared battles with patrol ships and won. We killed the destroyer Alexei Tolstoi off Europa and we shattered an American monitor over Syrtis itself, and watched the wreckage rain down on Yakki, the place where the Compact was born. And we lost the Moonmaid. The radio told us the story. Other new weapons were being developed against us, and here and there American and Russian spacecraft were seen in company for the first time in the history of the Age of Space. Convoys were formed from ships of both flags to protect spatial commerce from the imagined "great fleet" of the Compact. None knew that only the Arrow and the Starhound, small ships, weary ships, were left to face the slowly combining might of Earth. And then at last, the pickings -- growing slimmer always -- diminished to the vanishing point. Merril stood before us and gave the assembled crews their option. "The treasure hunt is over," our captain told us, "And those who wish may withdraw now. Take yoiuwomen and the space-boats and return to Mars. You have your shares, and you can live in comfort wherever you may choose. If you wish it, go now." Some few did go, but most remained. I watched Merril's face, and saw one last plan maturing there. Then he spoke again and we all understood. One last raid... to take Luna and command the world! "Still the unity of Mankind was not secure, and Merril, filled with impatience for his great dream, decided on one final stroke. He would descend on Luna Base itself with his fleet, and commanding all Earth, he would drive men together -- even though it might mean his own death. With this plan of self-immolation in his heart, the Peacemaker ordered his hosts and sought the pumice soil of the mother planet's moon... This is the way Quintus Bland, historian and scholar puts it down for posterity. I, one of "his hosts", would say it another way. We had gutted the Solar System of its treasure and at last men were uniting against us. Our "fleet" was reduced to two small ships and a bare handful of men and women to fight them. Jaq Merril could see the handwriting on the wall and he knew that all must be gambled on one last throw of the dice. Only with Terra herself under our guns could we hope to continue sucking the juice of the worlds into our mouths. It was all or nothing, for we had grown used to our life and we could no longer change it to meet the demands of the dawning age of Soviet-American amity. the Hound slanted sunward. Mars behind us, ahead lay the Earth-Moon system. Ten years had passed since any of us aboard the Compact ships had seen the home world, and though we no longer felt a part of it, the sight of the silvery cloud-flecked globe touched our hearts. Touched them as the sapphires of Mimas or the gold of Corfu touched them. We saw the planet that gave us birth and we were filled with hunger for it. To own it, command it, make it our own. Luna's mountains were white and stark under our keels as Merril led us across the curve of the southern horizon, seeking to put us into position to attack the UN Moon Base in Clavius from the direction of the Moon's hidden face. We swung low across unnamed mountain ranges and deep sheer valleys steeped in shadow. The voice of the ranger in the Arrow came softly through the open intercom into the tiny control room of the Hound. A woman's voice, tense with excitement, but disciplined and controlled. "Range five hundred miles, four seventy five, four fifty -- " And then Merril's voice, calm and reassuring, giving heart to all the untried ones aboard with his steady conning commands. "Four o'clock jet, easy, hold her. Drivers up one half standard. Steady goes. Meet her. Steady -- " Line astern now, the two ships flashing low across the jagged lunar landscape, and a world in the balance -- An alarm bell ringing suddenly, and my screen showing the fleeting outline of a Russian monitor above, running across our stern. My own voice, sharp with command: "Gun pointer!" "Here sir!" "C?et me that gunboat." The Hound's turret wound about with agonizing slowness as the monitor reached for the sky, clawing for altitude and safety. And then there came a searing blast of fire and the fragments of the Russian gunboat raining down lazily, seeking their eternal rest in the pumice of Luna's hidden face. But they had been warned at the UN Base. The monitor had left one dying shriek in the ether, and the waiting garrison had heard. Merril knew it, and so did I. We moved forward calmly, into the jaws of hell. The Arrow attacked from ten o'clock, low on the horizon, the Hound from twelve o'clock high. We swept in over the batteries of pulsating projectors, raining down our bombs. The ground shuddered and shook with the fury of exploding uranium and the sky was laced with a net of fiery death. The Hound shrieked her protest as I swung her about for another attack. There was a sickening swerve and the smell of ozone in my ship. Somewhere, deep within her, a woman screamed and I felt the deck under me give as one of the questing beams from the fortress below cut into the hull. Airtight doors slammed throughout the wounded vessel, and I drove her to the attack again, hard. The last of the bombs clattered out of the events, sending mushrooms of pumice miles into the black sky. One battery of guns below fell silent. The Arrow vanished into the night above and as suddenly reappeared, her forward tubes spewing red fire onto the Base below. Then Merril pulled her up again and disappeared among the pale stars. The Hound's hurt was mortal, I could feel her dying under my hands, and tears streaked my face. Below decks, she was a shambles where the cutting beam from the ground had torn part of her heart out. Still I fought her. There was no retreat from this last raid, nor did I wish any. There was a madness in us -- a bloodlust as hot and demanding as ever our lust for gold and treasure might have been. I lashed the face of the fortress with the Hound's forward tubes, frantically, filled with a hateful anguish. I felt my ship losing way, twisting and seeking rest on the jagged ground below, and thinking he had deserted us, I cursed Merril in an ecstacy of blind fury. Again and again the Hound was hit. I knew then that Merril's plan had been madness, a last gesture of defiance to the new age of unity among men. The Hound fell at last, spitting fire and gall in a futile dance of death. She struck on a lugh plateau, grinding into the pumice, rolling with macabre abandon across the face of the high tableland. Then at last she was still, hissing and groaning fitfully as she died, her buccaneering days gone forever. I donned a suit and staggered, half dazed, out into the lunar night. A half-dozen men and women from the crew had survived the impact and they stood by the wreckage, faces under the plastic helmets turned skyward. They were one and all stunned and bleeding from the violence of the Hound's end, but they looked neither back nor around them. Their eyes were filled with the insane glory of the drama being enacted in the sky. The Arrow had returned. She lanced down out of the night like a spear of flame, vengeful and deadly. Straight into the mouth of the screaming guns she dove, death the Moon Base in fire, searing the men within -- Russian and American alike -- into the brotherhood of death. Miraculously, she pulled up out of her encircling net of flame. We watched in openmouthed wonder as she reached with sobbing heart for the sky just once again -- and then, failing, crippled and dying, she hung above the crater's rim, framed with deadly beams from below, but radiant in her own right -- gleaming in the light of the sun. This was defeat. We knew it as we stood by the tangled pile of steelite that had been the Hound and watched the Arrow die. But nothing in this life that I have lived ever told me so grandly that the Wall Decade was ended -- and our life of buccaneering with it -- as the thing that happened next. The Arrow's valve opened and a tiny figure stepped out -- into space. I did not need to be told that Jaq Merril was coming to meet the men he had welded together against him. Lazily, unreally, the tiny shape twisted over and over as it fell, until at last it vanished amid the raw welter of craters and ridges beyond the razor wall of Clavius... though one that will not he believed. I have taken the Peacemaker of the histories and painted him as he was. But men are ashamed, and the chronicles of history must be rewritten to hide their weaknesses, Jaq Merril has become a legend, and the man that I knew is forgotten. Merril -- pirate, fighter, grandiose dreamer. That was my captain. Not the colorless do-good creature of the legend. Merril fought for lust and greed, and these afe the things that will one day take men to the stars. He knew this truth, of course, and that was the substance of his great dream. Because of it, there are no longer walls in space, and the men who united to fight the Peacemaker will one day rule the universe. Meanwhile, chroniclers will write lies about him, and Jaq Merril's laughter will echo in some ghostly Valhalla beyond the farthest star.  p her. comfxrt it' mem There is a time for doing and a time for going home. But where is home in an ever-changing universe? By Mari Wolf I to go home." She didn't look at me. I followed her gaze to Earth, rising in the east. It came up over the desert horizon, a clear, bright star at this distance. Right now it was the Morning Star. It wasn't long before dawn. I looked back at Martha sitting quietly beside me with her shawl drawn tightly about her knees. She had waited to see it also, of course. It had become almost a ritual with us these last few years, staying up night after night to watch the earthrise. She didn't say anything more. Even the gentle squeak of her rocking chair had fallen silent. Only her hands moved. I could see them trembling where they lay folded in her lap, trembling with emotion and tiredness and old age. I knew what she was thinking. After seventy years there can be no secrets. We sat on the glassed-in veranda of our Martian home looking up at the Morning Star. To us it wasn't a point of light. It was the continents and oceans of Earth, the mountains and meadows and laughing streams of our childhood. We saw Earth still, though we had lived on Mars for almost sixty-six years. "Lewis," Martha whispered softly. "It's wry bright tonight, isn't it?" "Yes," I said. "It seems so near." She sighed and drew the shawl higher about her waist. "Only three months by rocket ship," she said. "We could be back home in three months, Lewis, if we went out on this week's run." I nodded. For years we'd watched the rocket ships streak upward through the thin Martian atmosphere, and we'd envied the men who so casually travelled from world to world. But it had been a useless envy, something of which we rarely spoke. Inside our veranda the air was cool and slightly moist. Earth air, perfumed with the scent of Earth roses. Yet we knew it was only illusion. Outside, just beyond the glass, the cold night air of Mars lay thin and alien and smelling of alkali. It seemed to me tonight that I could smell that ever-dry Martian dust, even here. I sighed, fumbling for my pipe. "Lewis," Martha said, very softly. "What is it?" I cupped my hands over the match flame. "Nothing. It's just that I wish -- I wish we could go home, right away. Home to Earth. I want to see it again, before we die." "We'll go back," I said. "Next year for sure. We'll have enough money then." She sighed. "Next year may be too late." I looked over at her, startled. She'd never talked like that before. I started to protest, but the words died away before I could even speak them. She was right. Next year might indeed be too late. Her work-coarsened hands were thin, too thin, and they never stopped shaking any more. Her body was a frail shadow of what it had once been. Even her voice was frail now. She was old. We were both old. There wouldn't be many more Martian summers for us, nor many years of missing Earth. "Why can't we go back this year. Lewis?" She smiled at me almost apologetically. She knew the reason as well as I did. "We can't," I said. "There's not enough money." "There's enough for our tickets." I'd explained all that to her before, too. Perhaps she'd forgotten Lately I often had to explain thing more than once. "You can't buy passage unless you have enough extra for insurance, and travelers' checks, and passport tax. The company has to protectitself. Unless you're financially responsible, they won't take you on the ships." She shook her head. "Sometimes I wonder if we'll ever have enough." i i I i years, but it was a pitifully small savings. We weren't rich people who could go down to the spaceport and buy passage on the rocket ships, no questions asked, no bond required. We were only farmers, eking our livelihood from the unproductive Martian soil, only two of the countless little people of the solar system. In all our lifetime we'd never been able to save enough to go home to Earth. "One more year," I said. "If the crop prices stay up..." She smiled, a sad little smile that didn't reach her eyes. "Yes, Lewis," she said. "One more year." But I couldn't stop thinking of what she'd said earlier, nor stop seeing her thin, tired body. Neither of us was strong any more, but of the two I was far stronger than she. When we'd left Earth she'd been as eager and graceful as a child. We hadn't been much past childhood then, either of us... "Somedmes I wonder why we ever came here," she said. "It's been a good life." She sighed. "I know. But now that it's nearly over, there's nothing to hold us here." "No," I said. "There's not." If we had had children it might have been different. As it was, we lived surrounded by the children and grandchildren of our friends. Our friends themselves were dead. One by one they had died, all of those who came with us on the first colonizing ship to Mars. All of those who came later, on the second and third ships. Their children were our neighbors now -- and they were Martian born. It wasn't the same. She leaned over and pressed my hand. "We'd better go in, Lewis," she said. "We need our sleep." Her eyes were raised again to the green star that was Earth. Watching her, I knew that I loved her now as much as when we had been young together. More, really, for we had added years of shared memories. I wanted so much to give her what she longed for, what we both longed for. But I couldn't think of any way to do it. Not this year. Once, almost seventy years before, I had smiled at the girl who had just promised to become my wife, and I'd said; "I'll give you the world, darling. All tied up in pink ribbons." I didn't want to think about that now. We got up and went into the house and shut the veranda door behind us. hours I lay in bed staring up at the shadowed ceiling, trying to think of some way to raise the money. But there wasn't any way that I could see. It would be at least eight months before enough of the greenhouse crops were harvested. What would happen, I wondered, if I went to the spaceport and asked for tickets? If I explained that we couldn't buy insurance, that we couldn't put up the bond guaranteeing we wouldn't become public charges back on Earth... But all the time I wondered I knew the answer. Rules were rules. They wouldn't be broken especially not for two old farmers who had long outlived their usefulness and their time. Martha sighed in her sleep and turned over. It was light enough now for me to see her face clearly. She was smiling. But a minute ago she had been crying, for the tears were still wet on her cheeks. Perhaps she was dreaming of Earth again. Suddenly, watching her, I didn't care if they laughed at me or lectured me on my responsibilities to the government as if I were a senile fool. I was going to the spaceport. I was going to find out if, somehow, we couldn't go back. I got up and dressed and went out, walking softly so as not to awaken her. But even so she heard me and called out to me. "Lewis... I turned at the head of the stairs and looked back into the room. "Don't get up, Martha," I said. "I'm going into town." "All right, Lewis." She relaxed, and a minute later she was asleep again. I tiptoed downstairs and out the front door to where the trike car was parked, #md started for the village a mile to the west. It was desert all the way. Dry, fine red sand that swirled upward in choking clouds, if you stepped off the pavement into it. The narrow road cut straight through it, linking the outlying district farms to the town. The farms themselves were planted in the desert. Small, glasseiin houses and barns, and large greenhouses roofed with even more glass, that sheltered the Earth plants and gave them Earth air to breathe. farmhouse John Emery hurried out to meet me. "Morning, Lewis," he said. "Going to town?" I shut off the motor and nodded. "I want to catch the early shuttle plane to the spaceport," I said. "I'm going to the city to buy some things..." I had to lie about it. I didn't want anyone to know we were even thinking of leaving, at least not until we had our tickets in our hands. "Oh," Emery said. "That's right. I suppose you'll be buying Martha an anniversary present." I stared at him blankly. I couldn't think what anniversary he meant. "You'll have been here thirtyfive years next week," he said. "That's a long time, Lewis..." Thirty-five years. It took me a minute to realize what he meant. He was right. That was how long we had been here, in Martian years. The others, those who had been born here on Mars, always used the Martian seasons. We had too, once. But lately we forgot, and counted in Earth time. It seemed more natural. "Wait a minute, Lewis," Emery said. "I'll ride into the village with you. There's plenty of time for you to make your plane." I went up on his veranda and sat down and waited for him to get ready. I leaned back in the swing chair and rocked slowly back and forth, wondering idly how many times I'd sat here. This was old Tom Emery's house. Or had been, until he died eight years ago. He'd built this swing chair the very first year we'd been on Mars. Now it was young John's. Young? That showed how old we were getting. John was sixty-three, in Earth years. He'd been bom that second winter, the month the parasites got into the greenhouses... He came back out onto the veranda. "Well, I'm ready, Lewis," he said. We went down to my trike car and got in. "You and Martha ought to get out more," he said. "Jenny's been asking me why you don't come to call." , I shrugged. I couldn't tell him ; we seldom went out because when we did we were always set apart and treated carefully, like children. He probably didn't even realize that it was so. "Oh," I said. "We like it at home." He smiled. "I suppose you do, after thirty-five years." I started the motor quickly, and from then on concentrated on my driving. He didn't say anything more. get to the village, but even so I was tired. Lately it grew harder and harder to drive, to keep the trike car on the narrow strip of pavement. I was glad when we pulled up in the square and got out. "I'll walk over to the plane with you," Emery said. "I've got plenty of time." "All right." "By the way, Lewis, Jenny and I and some of the neighbors thought we'd drop over on your anniversary." "That's fine," I said, trying to sound enthusiastic. "Come on over." "It's a big event," he said. "Deserves a celebration." The shuttle plane was just landing. I hurried over to the ticket window, with him right beside me. "I just wanted to be sure you'd be home," he said. "We wouldn't want you to miss your own party." "Party?" I said. "But John -- " He wouldn't even let me finish protesting. "Now don't ask any questions, Lewis. You wouldn't want to spoil the surprise, would you?" He chuckled. "Your plane's loading now. You'd better be going. Thanks for the ride, Lewis." I went across to the plane and got in. I hoped that somehow we wouldn't have to spend that Martian anniversary being congratulated and petted and babied. I didn't think Martha could stand it. But there wasn't any polite way to say no. spaceport. In less than an hour the plane dropped down to the air strip that flanked the rocket field. But it was like flying from one civilization to another. The city was big, almost like an Earth city. There was lots of traffic, cars and copters and planes. All the bustle of the spaceways stations. But although the city looked like Earth, it smelled as dry and alkaline as all the rest of Mars. I found the ticket office easily enough and went in. The young clerk barely glanced up at me. "Yes?" he said. "I want to inquire about tickets to Earth," I said. My hands were sweating, and I could feci my heart pounding too fast against my ribs. But my voice sounded casual, just the way I wanted it to sound. "Tickets?" the clerk said. "How many?" "Two. How much would they cost? Everything included." "Forty-two eighty," he said. His voice was still bored. "I could give them to you for the flight ter next. Tourist class, of course..." We didn't have that much. We were at least three hundred short. "Isn't there any way," I said hesitantly, "that I could get them for less? I mean, we wouldn't need insurance, would we?" He looked up at me for the first time, startled. "You don't mean you want them for yourself, do you?" "Why yes. For me and my wife." He shook his head. "I'm sorry," he said flatly. "But that would be impossible in any case. You're too old." He turned away from me and bent over his desk work again. The words hung in the air. Too old... too old... I clutched the edge of the desk and steadied myself and forced down the panic I could feel rising. "Do you mean," I said slowly, "that you wouldn't sell us tickets even if we had the money?" He glanced up again, obviously annoyed at my persistence. "That's right. No passengers over seventy carried without special visas. Medical precaution." I just stood there. This couldn't be happening. Not after all our years of working and saving and planning for the future. Not go back. Not even next year. Stay here, because we were old and frail and the ships wouldn't be bothered with us anyway. Martha... How could I tell her? How could I say, "We can't go home, Martha. They won't let us." I couldn't say it. There had to be .some other way. "Pardon me," I said to the clerk, "but who should I see about getting a visa?" He swept the stack of papers away with an impatient gesture and frowned up at me. "Over at the colonial office, I suppose," he said. "But it won't do you any good." I could read in his eyes what he thought of me. Of me and all the other farmers who lived in the outlying districts and raised crops and seldom came to the city. My clothes were old and provincial and out of style, and so was I, to him. "I'll try it anyway," I said. He started to say something, then bit it back and looked away from me again. I was keeping him from his work. I was just a rude old man interfering with the operation of the spaceways. Slowly I let go of the desk and turned to leave. It was hard to walk. My knees were trembling, and my whole body shook. It was all I could do not to cry. It angered me, the quavering in my voice and the weakness in my legs. I went out into the hall and looked for the directory that would point the way to the colonial office. It wasn't far off. I walked out onto the edge of the field and past the Earth rocket, its silver nose pointed up at the sky. I couldn't bear to look at it for longer than a minute. It was only a few hundred yards to the colonisJ office, but it seemed like miles. T his office was larger than the other, and much more comfortable. The man seated behind the desk seemed friendlier too. "May I help you?" he asked. "Yes," I said slowly. "The man at the ticket office told me to come here. I wanted to see about getting a permit to go back to Earth... His smile faded. "For yourself?" "Yes," I said woodenly. "For myself and my wife." "Well, Mr..." "Farwell. Lewis Farwell." "My name's Duane. Please sit down, won't you?... How old are you, Mr. Farwell?" "Eighty-seven," I said. "In Earth years." He frowned. "The regulations say no space travel for people past seventy, except in certain special cases..." I looked down at my hands. They were shaking badly. I knew he could see them shake, and was judging me as old and weak and unable to stand the trip. He couldn't know why I was trembling. "Please," I whispered. "It wouldn't matter if it hurt us. It's just that we want to see Earth again. It's been so long..." "How long have you been here, Mr. Farwell?" It was merely politeness. There wasn't any promise in his voice. "Sixty-five years." I looked up at him. "Isn't there some way -- " "Sixty-five years? But that means you must have come here on the first colonizing ship." "Yes," I said. "We did." "I can't believe it," he said slowly "I can't believe I'm actually looking at one of the pioneers." He shook his head. "I didn't even know any of them were still on Mars." "We're the last ones," I said. "That's the main reason we want to go back. It's awfully hard staying on when your friends are dead." D uane got up and crossed the room to the window and looked out over the rocket field. "But what good would it do to go back, Mr. Farwell?" he asked. "Earth has changed very much in the last sixty-five years." He was trying to soften the disappointment. But nothing could. If only I could make him realize that. "I know it's changed," I said. "But it's home. Don't you see? We're Earthmen still. I guess that never changes. And now that we're old, we're aliens here." "We're all aliens here, Mr. Farwell." "No," I said desperately. "Maybe you are. Maybe a lot of the city people are. But our neighbors were born on Mars. To them Earth is a legend. A place where their ancestors once lived. It's not real to them..." He turned and crossed the room and came back to me. His smile was pitying. "If you went back," he said, "you'd find you were a Martian, too." I couldn't reach him. He was friendly and pleasant and he was trying to make things easier, and it wasn't any use talking. I bent my head and choked back the sobs I could feel rising in my throat. "You've lived a full life," Duane said. "You were one of the pioneers. I remember reading about your ship when I was a boy, and wishing I'd been born sooner so that I could have been on it." Slowly I raised my head and looked up at him. "Please," I said. "I know that. I'm glad we came here. If we had our lives to live over, we'd come at;ain. We'd go through all the hardships of those first few years, and enjoy them just as much. We'd be just as thrilled over proving that it's possible to farm a world like this, where it's always freezing and the air is thin and nothing will grow outside the greenhouses. You don't need to tell me what we've done, or what we've gotten out of it. We know. We've had a wonderful life here." "But you still want to go back?" "Yes," I said. "We still want to go back. We're tired of living in the past, with our friends dead and nothing to do except remember." He looked at me for a long moment. Then he said slowly, "You realize, don't you, that if you went back to Earth you'd have to stay there? You couldn't return to Mars..." "I realize that," I said. "That's what we want. We want to die at home. On Earth." F or a long, long moment his eyes never left mine. Then, slowly, he sat down at his desk and reached for a pen. "All right, Mr. Farwell," he said. "I'll give you a visa." I couldn't believe it. I stared at him, sure that I'd misunderstood. "Sixty-five years..." He shook his head. "I only hope I'm doing the right thing. I hope you won't regret this." "We won't," I whispered. Then I remembered that we were still short of money. That that was why I'd come to the spaceport originally. I was almost afraid to mention it, for fear I'd lose everything. "Is there -- is there some way we could be excused from the insurance?" I said. "So we could go back this year? We're three hundred short." He smiled. It was a very reassuring smile. "You don't need to worry about the money," he said. "The colonial office can take care of that. After all, we owe your generation a great debt, Mr. Farwell. A passport tax and the fare to Earth are little enough to pay for a planet." I didn't quite understand him, but that didn't matter. The only thing that mattered was that we were going home. Back to Earth. I could see Martha's face when I told her. I could see her tears of happiness... There were tears on my own cheeks, but I wasn't ashamed of them now. "Mr. Farwell," Duane said. "You go back home. The shuttle ship will be leaving in a few minutes." "You mean that -- " I started. He nodded. "I'll get your tickets for you. On the first ship I can. Just leave it to me." "It's too much trouble," I protested "No it's not." He smiled. "Besides, I'd like to bring them out to you. I'd like to see your farm, if I may." Then I remembered what John Emery had said this morning about our anniversary. It would be a wonderful celebration, now that there was something to celebrate. We could even save our announcement that we were going home until then. "Mr. Duane," I said. "Next week, on the tenth, we'll have been here thirty-five Martian years. Maybe you'd like to come out then. I guess our neighbors will be giving us a sort of party." He laid the pen down and looked at me very intently. "They don't know you're planning to leave yet, do they?" "No. We'll wait and tell them then." Duane nodded slowly. "I'll be there," he promised. M artha was out on the veranda again, looking down the road toward the village. All afternoon at least one of us had been out there watching for our guests, waiting for our anniversary celebration to begin. "Do you see anyone yet?" I called. "No," she said. "Not yet..." I looked around the room hoping I'd find something left undone that I could work on, so I wouldn't have to sit and worry about the possibility of Duane's having forgotten us. But everything was ready. The extra chairs were out and the furniture all dusted, and Martha's cakes and cookies arranged on the table. I couldn't sit still. Not today. I got up out of the chair and joined her on the veranda. "I wonder what their surprise is..." she said. "Didn't John give you any hint at all?" "No," I said. "But whatever it is, it can't be half as wonderful as ours." She reached for my hand. "Lewis," she whispered. "I can hardly believe it, can you?" "No," I said. "But it's true. We're really going." I put my arm around her, and she rested her head against me. "I'm so happy, Lewis." Her cheeks were full of color once again, and her step had a spring to it that I hadn't seen for years. It was as if the years of waiting were falling away from both of us now. "I wish they'd come," she said. "I can hardly wait to see their faces when we tell them." It was getting late in the afternoon. Already the sun was dipping down toward the desert horizon. It was hard to wait. In some ways it was harder to be patient these last few hours than it had been during all those years we'd wanted to go back. "Look," Martha said suddenly. "There's a car now." Then I saw the car too, coming quickly toward us. It pulled up in front of the house and stopped and Duane stepped out. "Well, hello there, Mr. Farwell," he called. "All ready for the trip?" I nodded. Suddenly, now that he was here, I couldn't say anything at all. He must have seen how excited we were. By the time he was inside the veranda door he'd reached into his wallet and pulled out a long envelope. "Here's your schedule," he said. "Your tickets are all made out for next week's flight." Martha's hand crept into mine. "You've been so kind," she whispered. smiled at each other while Duane admired the furniture and the farming district in general and our place in particular. We hardly heard what he was saying. When the doorbell rang we stared at each other. For a minute I couldn't think who it might be. I'd forgotten our guests and their surprise party, even the anniversary itself had slipped my mind. "Hello in there," John Emery called. "Come on out, you two." Martha pressed my hand once more. Then she stepped to the door and opened it. "Happy anniversary!" We stood frozen. We'd expected only a few visitors, some of our nearest neighbors. But the yard was full of people. They crowded up our walk and in the road and more of them were still piling out of cars. It looked as if everyone in the district was along. "Come on out," Emery called. "You too, Duane." The two men smiled at each other knowingly, and for just a moment I had time to wonder why. Then Martha clutched my arm. "You tell him, Lewis." "John," I said. "We have a surprise for you too -- He wouldn't let me finish. He took hold of my arm with one hand and Martha's with the other and drew us outside where everyone could see us. "You can tell us later, Lewis," he said, "First we have a surprise for you!" "But wait -- " They crowded in around us, laughing and waving and calling "Happy anniversary". We couldn't resist them. They swept us along with them down the walk and into one of the cars. I looked around for Duane. He was in the back seat, smiling somewhat nervously. Perhaps he thought that this was normal farm life. "Lewis," Martha said, "where are they taking us?" "I don't know..." The cars started, ours leading the way. It was a regular procession back to the village, with everyone laughing and calling to us and telling us how happy we were going to be with our surprise. Every time we tried to ask questions, John Emery interrupted. "Just wait and see," he kept saying. "Wait and see... A t the end of the village square they'd put up a platform. It wasn't very big, nor very well made, but it was strung with yards of bunting and a huge sign that said, "Happy Anniversary, Lewis and Martha." We were pushed toward it, carried along by the swarm of people. There wasn't any way to resist. Martha clung to my arm, pressing close against me. She was trembling again. "What does it mean, Lewis?" "I wish I knew," They pushed us right up onto the platform and John Emery followed us up and held out his hand to quiet the crowd. I put my arm around Martha and looked down at them. Hundreds of people. All in their best clothes. Our friends's children and grandchildren, and even greatgrandchildren. "I won't make a speech," John Emery said when they were finally quiet. "You know why we're here today -- all of you except Lewis and Martha know. It's an anniversary. A big anniversary. Thirty-five years today since our fathers -- and you two -- landed here on Mars..." He paused. He didn't seem to know what to say next. Finally he turned and swept his arm past the platform to where a big canvas-covered object stood on the ground. "Unveil it," he said. The crowd grew absolutely quiet. A couple of boys stepped up and pulled the canvas off. "There's your surprise," John Emery said softly. It was a statue. A life-size statue carved from the dull red stone of Mars. Two figures, a man and a woman, dressed in farm clothes, standing side by side and looking out across the square toward the open desert. They were very real, those figures. Real, and somehow familiar. "Lewis," Martha whispered. "They're -- they're us!" She W#S right. It was a statue of us. Neither old nor young, but ageless. Two farmers, looking out forever across the endless Martian desert... There was an inscription on the base, but I couldn't quite make it out. Martha could. She read it, slowly, while everyone in the crowd stood silent, listening. "Lewis and Martha Farwell," she read. "The last of the pioneers -- " Her voice broke. "Underneath," she whispered, "it says -- the first Martians. And then it lists them -- us..." She read the list, all the names of our friends who had come out on that first ship. The names of men and women who had died, one by one, and left their farms to their children -- to the same children who now crowded close about the platform and listened to her read, and smiled up at us. She came to the end of the list and looked out at the crowd. "Thank you," she whispered. They shouted then. They called out to us and pressed forward and held their babies up to see us. across the flat red desert to the horizon, toward the spot in the east where the Earth would rise, much later. The dry smell of Mats had never been stronger. The first Martians... They were so real, those carved figures. Lewis and Martha Farwell... "Look at them, Lewis," Martha said softly. "They're cheering us. Us!" She was smiling. There were tears in her eyes, but her smile was bright and proud and shining. Slowly she turned away frcim me and straightened, staring ovit over the heads of the crowd across the desert to the east. She stood with her head thrown back arid her mouth smiling, and she was as proudly erect as the statue that was her likeness. "Martha," I whispered. "How can we tell them goodbye?" Then she turned to face me, and I could see the tears glistening in lil t !!. "We can't leave, Lewis. N I .liter this." li(' was right, of course. We I niildn't leave. We were symbols. Tilllast of the pioneers. The first .M.irtians. And they had carved thi-ir symbol in our image and made us a part of Mars forever. I glanced down, along the rows of upturned, laughing faces, searching for Duane. He was easy to find. He was the only one who wasn't shouting. His eyes met mine, and I didn't have to say anything. He knew. He climbed up beside me on the platform. I tried to speak, but I couldn't. "Tell him, Lewis," Martha whispered. "Tell him we can't go." Then she was crying. Her smile was gone and her proud look was gone and her hand crept into mine and trembled there. I put my arm around her shoulders, but there was no way I could comfort her. "Now we'll never go," she sobbed. "We'll never get home..." I don't think I had ever realized, until that moment, just how much it meant to her -- getting home. Much more, perhaps, than it had ever meant to me. The statues were only statues. They were carved from the stone of Mars. And Martha wanted Earth. We both wanted Earth. Home... I looked away from her then, back to Duane. "No," I said. "We're still going. Only -- " I broke off, hearing the shouting and the cheers and the children's laughter. "Only, how can we tell them?" Duane smiled. "Don't try to, Mr. Farwell," he said softly. "Just wait and see." He turned, nodded to where John Emery still stood at the edge of the platform. "All right, John." Emery nodded too, and then he raised his hand. As he did so, the shouting stopped and the people stood suddenly quiet, still looking up at us. "You all know that this is an anniversary," John Emery said. "And you all know something else that Lewis and Martha thought they'd kept as a surprise -- that this is more than an anniversary. It's goodbye." I stared at him. He knew. All of them knew. And then I looked at Duane and saw that he was smiling more than ever. "They've lived here on Mars for thirty-five years," John Emery said. "And now they're going back to' Earth." Martha's hand tightened on mine. "Look, Lewis," she cried. "Look at them. They're not angry. They're -- they're happy for us!" John Emery turned to face us. "Surprised?" he said. I nodded. Martha nodded too. Behind him, the people cheered again. "I thought you would be," Emery said. Then, "I'm not very good at speeches, but I just wanted you to know how much we've enjoyed being your neighbors. Don't forget us when you get back to Earth." Mars to Earth. Three months miles. A trip we had dreamed about for so long, without any real hope of ever making it. But now it was over. We were back on Earth. Back where we had started from. "It's good to be alone, isn't it, Lewis?" Martha leaned back in her chair and smiled up at me. I nodded. It did feel good to be here in the apartment, just the two of us, away from the crowds and the speeches and the official welcomes and the flashbulbs popping. "I wish they wouldn't make such a fuss over us," she said. "I wish they'd leave us alone." "You can't blame them," I said, although I couldn't help wishing the same thing. "We're celebrities. What was it that reporter said about us? That we're part of history..." She sighed. She turned away from me and looked out the window again, past the buildings and the lighted traffic ramps and the throngs of people bustling by outside, people who couldn't see in through the one-way glass, people whom we couldn't hear because the room was soundproofed. "Mars should be up by now," she said. "It probably is." I looked out again, although I knew that we would see nothing. No stars. No planets. Not even the moon, except as a pale half disc peering through the haze. The lights from the city were too bright. The air held the light and reflected it down again, and the sky was a deep, dark blue with the buildings about us towering into it, outlined blackly against it. And we couldn't sec the stars... "Lewis," Martha said slowly. "I never thought it would have changed this much, did you?" "No." I couldn't tell from her voice whether she liked the changes or not. Lately I couldn't tell much of anything from her voice. And nothing was the same as we had remembered it. Even the Earth farms were mechanized now. Factory production lines for food, as well as for everything else. It was necessary, of course. We had heard all the reasons, all the theories, all the latest statistics. "I guess I'll go to bed soon," Martha said. "I'm tired." "It's the higher gravity." We'd both been tired since we got back to Earth. We had forgotten, over the years, what Earth gravity was like. She hesitated. She smiled at me, but her eyes were worried. "Lewis -- are you really glad we came back?" It was the first time she had asked me that. And there was only one answer I could give her. The one she expected. "Of course, Martha..." She sighed again. She got up out of the chair and turned toward the bedroom door, and then she paused there by the window looking out at the deep blue sky. "Are you really glad, Lewis?" Then I knew. Or, at least, I hoped. "Why, Martha? Aren't you?" For one long minute she stood beside me, looking up at the Mars we couldn't see. And then she turned to face me once again, and I could see the tears. "Oh, Lewis, I want to go home !" Full circle. We had both come full circle these last few hectic weeks on Earth. "So do I, Martha." "Do you, Lewis?" And then the lircdncss came back to her eyes and she looked away again. "But of course we can't." Slowly I crossed over to the desk and opened the top drawer and took out the folder that Duane had given me, that last day at the spaceport, just before our ship to Earth had blasted off. Slowly I unfolded the paper that Duane had told me to keep in case we ever wanted it. "Yes, we can, Martha. We can (Continued from page #) But in the middle of his talk he broke off suddenly. A flash of blindwindows. Horror painted his face. In a whisper, he cried; "No! No! It would make it all so senseless!" His eyes looked like the eyes of a man with flaming splinters jammed under his fingernails. His face seemed to pucker, and grow infantile. Then he screamed: "No! Leave me alone! I told you I didn't want to come out here, to be one of you! Damn you, why did you bring me out here? For -- for this?..." There were the shards of glass from the great auditorium windows, floating inward, turning lazily. There were the brick walls crumbling, tumbling inward, scattering through the air in the same seeming slow motion. The dust cloud and the sound, the flat blastsound, came after that, as the entire building -- perhaps the world -- go back." "What's that, Lewis?" And then she saw what it was. Her face came alive again, and her eyes were shining. "We're going home?" she whispered. "We're really going home?" I looked down at the Earth-Mars half of the round trip ticket that Duane had given me, and I knew that this time she was right. This time we'd really be going home. end disintegrated ill itlie: feye-searing light... December #th, #, Two-Thirty A.M. The flat of a rubber-gloved hand striking flesh made a splatting noise. A thin, breathless but concentrated crying followed. The doctor looked down at his charity clinic patient, the woman under the bright delivery room lights. "Look at him -- fighting like a little demon!" the doctor said. "Seemed almost as though he didn't want to come out and join us... What's the matter, son? This is a bright, new, wonderful world to be born into... What are you going to call the boy, Mrs. McKinney?" The woman under the lights forced a tired smile. "Jeff. Jefferson McKinney. That's going to be his name," she whispered proudly. The baby's terrified squalling subsided into fretful, whimpering resignation. The atomic bomb meant, to most people, the end. To Henry Bemis it meant something far different -- a thing to appreciate and enjoy. Time Enough At Last By Lynn Venable F or a long time, Henry was never enough time. It looked Bemis had had an ambition, as though Henry's ambition would To read a book. Not just the title never be realized. Then something or the preface, or a page somehappened which changed all that, where in the middle. He wanted Henry was down in the vault of to read the whole thing, all the way the Eastside Bank  Trust when it through from beginning to end. A happened. He had stolen a few simple ambition perhaps, but in the moments from the duties of his cluttered life of Henry Bemis, an teller's cage to try to read a few impossibility. pages of the magazine he had Henry had no time of his own. bought that morning. He'd made There was his wife, Agnes who an excuse to Mr. Carsville about owned that part of it that his emneeding bills in large denominaployer, Mr. Carsville, did not buy. tions for a certain customer, and Henry was allowed enough to get to then, safe inside the dim recesses of and from work -- that in itself being the vault he had pulled from inside quite a concession on Agnes' part, his coat the pocket size magazine. Also, nature had conspired He had just started a picture aragainst Henry by handing him with tide cheerfully entitled "The New a pair of hopelessly myopic eyes. Weapons and What They'll Do To hand in front of his face. For a world crashed in upon his earwhile, when he was very young, his drums. It seemed to be inside of parents had thought him an idiot, him and outside of him all at once. When they realized it was his eyes. Then the concrete floor was rising they got glasses for him. He was up at him and the ceiling came never quite able to catch up. There slanting down toward him, and for a fleeting second Henry thought of a story he had started to read once called "The Pit and The Pendulum". He regretted in that insane moment that he had never had time to finish that story to see how it came out. Then all was darkness and quiet and unconsciousness. knew that something was desperately wrong with the Eastside Bank  Trust. The heavy steel door of the vault was buckled and twisted and the floor tilted up at a dizzy angle, while the ceiling dipped crazily toward it. Henry gingerly got to his feet, moving arms and legs experimentally. Assured that nothing was broken, he tenderly raised a hand to his eyes. His precious glasses were intact, thank God! He would never have been able to find his way out of the shattered vault without them. He made a mental note to write Dr. Torrance to have a spare pair made and mailed to him. Blasted nuisance not having his prescription on file locally, but Henry trusted no-one but Dr. Torrance to grind those thick lenses into his own complicated prescription. Henry removed the heavy glasses from his face. Instantly the room dissolved into a neutral blur. Henry saw a pink splash that he knew was his hand, and a white blob come up to meet the pink as he withdrew his pocket handkerchief and carefully dusted the lenses. As he replaced the glasses, they slipped down on the bridge of his nose a little. He had been meaning to have them tightened for some time. He suddenly realized, without the realization actually entering his conscious thoughts, that something momentous had happened, something worse than the boiler blowing up, something worse than a gas main exploding, something worse than anything that had ever happened before. He felt that way because it was so quiet. There was no whine of sirens, no shouting, no running, just an ominous and all pervading silence, H enry walked across the slanting floor. Slipping and stumbling on the uneven surface, he made his way to the elevator. The ear lay crumpled at the foot of the shaft like a discarded accordian. There was something inside of it that Henry could not look at, something that had once been a person, or perhaps several people, it was impossible to tell now. Feeling sick, Henry staggered toward the stairway. The steps were still there, but so jumbled and piled back upon one another that it was more like climbing the side of a mountain than mounting a stairway. It was quiet in the huge chamber that had been the lobby of the bank. It looked strangely cheerful with the sunlight shining through the girders where the ceiling had fallen. The dappled sunlight glinted across the silent lobby, and everywhere there were huddled lumps of unpleasantness that made Henry sick as he tried not to look at them. "Mr. CarsvLlle," he called. It was very quiet. Something had to be done, of course. This was terrible, right in the middle of a Monday, too. Mr. Carsville would know what to do. He called again, more loudly, and his voice cracked hoarsely, "Mr. Carrrrsville !" And then he saw an arm and shoulder extending out from under a huge fallen block of marble ceiling. In the buttonhole was the white carnation Mr. Carsville had worn to work that morning, and on the third finger of that hand was a massive signet ring, also belonging to Mr. Carsville. Numbly, Henry realized that the rest of Mr. Carsville was under that block of marble. Henry felt a pang of real sorrow. Mr. Carsville was gone, and so was the rest of the staff -- Mr. Wilkinson and Mr. Emory and Mr. Prithard, and the same with Pete and Ralph and Jenkins and Hunter doorman. There was no one to say what was to be done about the Eastside Bank  Trust except Henry Bemis, and Henry wasn't worried about the bank, there was something he wanted to do. He climbed carefully over piles of fallen masonry. Once he stepped down into something that crunched and squashed beneath his feet and he set his teeth on edge to keep from retching. The street was not much different from the inside, bright sunlight and so much concrete to crawl over, but the unpleasantness was much, much worse. Everywhere there were strange, motionless lumps that Henry could not look at. Suddenly, he remembered Agnes. He should be trying to get to Agnes, shouldn't he? He remembered a poster he had seen that said, "In event of emergency do not use the telephone, your loved ones are as safe as you." He wondered about Agnes. He looked at the smashed automobiles, some with their four wheels pointing skyward like the stiffened legs of dead animals. He couldn't get to Agnes now anyway, if she was safe, then, she was safe, otherwise... of course, Henry knew Agnes wasn't safe. He had a feeling that there wasn't anyone safe for a long, long way, maybe not in the whole state or the whole country, or the whole world. No, that was a thought Henry didn't want to think, he forced it from his mind and turned his thoughts back to Agnes. wife, now that it was all said and done. It wasn't exactly her fault if people didn't have time to read nowadays. It was just that there was the house, and the bank, and the yard. There were the Jones' for bridge and the Graysons' for canasta and charades with the Bryants. And the television, the television Agnes loved to watch, but would never watch alone. He never had time to read even a newspaper. He started thinking about last night, that business about the newspaper. Henry had settled into his chair, quietly, afraid that a creaking spring might call to Agnes' attention the fact that he was momentarily unoccupied. He had unfolded the newspaper slowly and carefully, the sharp crackle of the paper would have been a clarion call to Agnes. He had glanced at the headlines of the first page. "Collapse Of ( 'nfcrncc Imminent." He didn't li.ui time to read the article. He turned to the second page. "Solon I'li'dicts War Only Days Away." Ur flipped through the pages faster, reading brief snatches here and there, afraid to spend too much time on any one item. On a back page was a brief article entitled, "Prehistoric Artifacts Unearthed In Yucatan". Henry smiled to himself and carefully folded the sheet of paper into fourths. That would be interesting, he would read all of it. Then it came, Agnes' voice. "Henrrreeel" And then she was upon him. She lightly flicked the paper out of his hands and into the fireplace. He saw the flames lick up and curl possessively around the unread article. Agnes continued, "Henry, tonight is the Jones' bridge night. They'll be here in thirty minutes and I'm not dressed yet, and here you are... reading She had emphasized the last word as though it were an unclean act. "Hurry and shave, you know how smooth Jasper Jones' chin always looks, and then straighten up this room." She glanced regretfully toward the fireplace. "Oh dear, that paper, the television schedule... oh well, after the Jones leave there won't be time for anything but the late-late movie and... Don't just sit there, Henry, hurrreeee!" Henry was hurrying now, but hurrying too much. He cut his leg on a twisted piece of metal that had oiui' been an automobile fender. He tie light about things like lockjaw .#(I gangrene and his hand tnanbled as he tied his pockethatulKerehief around the wound. In his mind, he saw the fire again, licking across the face of last night's newspaper. He thought that now he would have time to read all the newspapers he wanted to, only now there wouldn't be any more. That heap of rubble across the street had been the Gazette Building. It was terrible to think there would never be another up to date newspaper. Agnes would have been very upset, no television schedule. But then, of course, no television. He wanted to laugh but he didn't. That wouldn't have been fitting, not at all. He could see the building he was looking for now, but the silhouette was strangely changed. The great circular dome was now a ragged semi-circle, half of it gone, and one of the great wings of the building had fallen in upon itself. A sudden panic gripped Henry Bemis. What if they were all ruined, destroyed, every one of them? What if there wasn't a single one left? Tears of helplessness welled in his eyes as he painfully fought his way over and through the twisted fragments of the city. when it had been whole. He reme.mbered the many nights he had paused outside its wide and welcoming doors. He thought of the warm nights when the doors had been thrown open and he could see the people inside, see them sitting at the plain wooden tables with the stacks of books beside them. He used to think then, what a wonderful thing a public library was, a place where anybody, anybody at all could go in and read. He had been tempted to enter many times. He had watched the people through the open doors, the man in greasy work clothes who sat near the door, night after night, laboriously studying, a technical journal perhaps, difficult for him, but promising a brighter future. There had been an aged, scholarly gentleman who sat on the other side of the door, leisurely paging, moving his lips a little as he did so, a man having little time left, but rich in time because he could do with it as he chose. Henry had never gone in. He had started up the steps once, got almost to the door, but then he remembered Agnes, her questions and shouting, and he had turned away. He was going in now though, almost crawling, his breath coming in stabbing gasps, his hands tom and bleeding. His trouser leg was sticky red where the wound in his leg had soaked through the handkerchief. It was throbbing badly but Henry didn't care. He had reached his destination. Part of the inscription was still there, over the now doorless entrance. P-U-B-C L-I-B-R -- . The rest had been torn away. The place was in shambles. The shelves were overturned, broken, smashed, tilted, their precious contents spilled in disorder upon the floor. A lot of the books, Henry noted gleefully, were still intact, still whole, still readable. He was literally knee deep in them, he wallowed in books. He picked one up. The title was "Colspeare." Yes, he must read that, sometime. He laid it aside carefully. He picked up another. Spinoza. He tossed it away, seized another, and another, and still another. Which to read first... there were so many. He had been conducting himself a little like a starving man in a delicatessen -- grabbing a little of this and a little of that in a frenzy of enjoyment. But now he steadied away. From the pile about him, he selected one volume, sat comfortably down on an overturned shelf, and opened the book. Henry Bemis smiled. There was the rumble of complaining stone. Minute in comparison which the epic complaints following the fall of the bomb. This one occurred under one corner of the shelf upon which Henry sat. The shelf moved; threw him off balance. The glasses slipped from his nose and fell with a tinkle. He bent down, clawing blindly and found, finally, their smashed remains. A minor, indirect destruction stemming from the sudden, wholesale smashing of a city. But the only one that greatly interested Henry Bemis. He stared down at the blurred page before him. He began to cry. A ccording to Einstein, the history of physical science, has brought forth four great scientists -- Galileo, Nevnon, Maxwell and Faraday -- and Einstein is a man who should know. Of these, Galileo and Newton are probably the most famous. Perhaps Maxwell wielded the most, influence in his own time. But in the realm of things physical for the benefit of posterity, Faraday was by far the greatest. Faraday was born in London in the year #I -- long before General Electric and Westinghouse began gleaning likely young men from colleges and placing them in shiny laboratories. His father was a blacksmith, who became an invalid and died in Michael's youth leaving the boy's mother with no alternative but to take in boarders for the support of her family. They were deeply religious people, sober-minded and hardworking -- traits which remained ingrained in Faraday until his death. He began showing his talents quite early when, by chance, he was thrown into contact with books. This came about in his thirteenth year when he got work in the rooms of one Masquerier, a French refugee fleeing the wrath of Napoleon. Faraday's jobs were to keep Masquerier's shoes shined and his rooms orderly. This gave the youth an opportunity to browse through the Frenchman's library. He practically memorized two encyclopedias on electricity and digested Marcet'sConversations on Chemistry in great gobs. Now, young Faraday begged and borrowed, from his elder brother, the necessary admission fees to attend scientific lectures where ever and whenever he could find them. His activities are remindful of the present day teen-age fan who idolizes a current glamour personality, forms fan clubs and whatnot. Faraday formed no clubs, but he was not backward in contacting his idols. He wrote a letter to no less an august personage than Sir Joseph Banks, the President of the Royal Society. Sir Joseph neglected to answer, but that is of no great importance. Later, he would have been glad to visit Faradary in person. Young Faraday's persistence payed off, however, when he attended a lecture by the great Sir Humphry Davy -- with a pencil and a ream or two of notepaper under his arm. He took notes on Davy's lecture -- # pages of them. These, he had delivered to Davy along with a note stating that he, Faraday, wished to devote his life to science, and could Davy be of any assistance in the project. Davy, one of the most eccentric geniuses who ever lived, was also a warm human being. Davy replied to Faraday in the formal, stilted manner of the day: Sir: I am far from displeased with the proof you have given me of your confidence, and which displays great zeal, power of memory, and attention. I am obliged to go out of town, and will not be settled in town until the end of January. I will then see you at any time you wish. It would gratify me to be of any service to you. I wish it may be in my power. I am, sir, your obedient, humble servant, H. Davy This was not at all unlike a science fiction fan getting an invitation to drop around from Ray Bradbury or Robert Heinlein. You may rest assured that Faraday took full advantage of it. Davy could be of assistance, to the extent of getting Faraday a job as assistant in the laboratory of the Royal Institution. Thus did Davy, unknowingly, render his greatest service to humanity . So, at the age of twenty-one, Faraday became established at the Institution and Davy, no doubt delighted that his casual favor to a letter-writing youth had paid off in such rich material, took Faraday on a tour of Europe -- a grand tour, as Davy, the big name in the scientific fields of his time, did not travel without notice. Upon returning to England, Faraday became a lecturer in the Royal Institution, and was launched upon his life work. were engrossed in the mysteries of electricity. Faraday's keen mind cut like a knife into these mysteries. He suspected the close relationship between electricity and magnetism. None of the active scientists of the time had paid much attention to this avenue of research, although experimented in that direction. Orsted was the first to suggest that motion should be obtainable from the interaction of magnetism and electricity. Faraday drove relentlessly along these avenues, experimenting exhaustively, building upon the work of both Orsted and Ampere. Writing of his own work, Faraday said:... so all the usual attractions and repulsions of the magnetic needle by the conjunctive wire are deceptions, the motions being not attractions nor repulsions... but the result of a force in the wire which, instead of bringing the pole of the needle nearer to, or further from the wire, endeavors to make it move around it in a never ending circle and motion while the battery remains in action." From this statement of his observational results, Faraday invented the electric motor and established his immortality. But all was not sweetness and light. Faraday's sense of personal triumph was dulled by a reversal upon the part of Humphry Davy. The trouble sprang from Faradays inadvertent conflict with the work of Davy and Wollaston. Both these scientists were plodding along over the route Faraday covered with a speed which bespoke his genius. When Faraday's name was proposed for membership in the Royal Society it was -- Ironically enough -- Sir Humphry Davy who asked Faraday to withdraw. Faraday replied that it was beyond his power to withdraw, which was true, but Davy, as President of the august organization, had all the power he needed to block Faraday. However, in the year #, Faraday was elected to the Society and stood at last, on par in all respects, with all the greats of his time. He was fated to clash again with Davy, over the liquefaction of chlorine. Davy had discovered, beyond doubt, the knowledge that the solid substance obtained by exposing chlorine to low temperatures was not chlorine, but a combination of elements in which chlorine was no longer alone. Davy had not analyzed this combination however, and Faraday did. Also, he followed Davy's suggestion that heat, applied to the specimens, might bring inten sting results. Faraday applied the heat and came up with liquid chlorine. He then wrote a paper upon the experiment and the discovery -- a paper which passed through Davy's hands as President of the Society. Davy blandly appended a few paragraphs, taking full credit for the results. Faraday said nothing, biding his time. Later he wrote an account of all the investigators who had liquefied chlorine before either himself or Davy. All semblance of cordiality between Davy and Faraday now ruptured completely. Hard times fell upon the Society, and Faraday became occupied with the necessity of struggling along upon less money than previously. But this did not slow down his productivity. His papers on chemical investigations poured out in a broad stream. During the decade following #, when he made his great discovery relative to electro-magnetism, Faraday published little upon electricity, but his experiments went on. He made copious notes for current and future experience, indicating that while he concentrated upon chemical research, his heart had been given to the elusive witch of invisible power who mocked scientific brains with her vagaries. He began exhaustive investigations into the possibility of converting magnetism into electricity. The epochal discovery of electro-magnetic induction was the result. This discovery served as a pivotal point in scientific progress. This could have been enough for any man, but like a great scientist who came later, Thomas Alva Edison, Faraday felt a man's productivity should be terminated only by (Continued on page #) In order to make Izaak Walton's sport complete, there must be an angler, a fish, and some bait. All three existed on Arz but there was a question as to which was which. The Anglers of Arz By Roger Dee Marco Four's landfall on the moonless Altarian planet was a repetition of the two before it, a nine-hour intermission of drowsy, pastoral peace. Navigator Arthur Farrell -- it was his turn to stand watch -- was sitting at an open-side port with a magnoscanner ready; but in spite of his vigilance he had not exposed a film when the inevitable pre-dawn rainbow began to shimmer over the eastern ocean. Sunrise brought him alert with a jerk, frowning at sight of two pinkish, bipedal Arzian fishermen posted on the tiny coral islet a quarter-mile offshore, their blank triangular faces turned stolidly toward the beach. "They're at it again," Farrell called, and dropped to the mossy turf outside. "Roll out on the double! I'm going to magnofilm this!" Stryker and Gibson came out of their sleeping cubicles reluctantly, belting on the loose shorts which all three wore in the balmy Arzian climate. Stryker blinked and yawned as he let himself through the port, his fringe of white hair tousled and his naked paunch sweating. He looked, Farrell thought for the thousandth time, more like a retired cook than like the veteran commander of a Terran Colonies expedition. Gibson followed, stretching his powerfully-muscled body like a wrestler to throw off the effects of sleep. Gibson was linguist-ethnologist of the crew, a blocky man in his early thirties with thick black hair and heavy brows that shaded a square, humorless face. "Any sign of the squids yet?" he asked. "They won't show up until the dragons come," Farrell saiid. He adjusted the light filter of the magnoscanner and scowled at Stryker. "Lee, I wish you'd let me break up the show this time with a dis-beam. This butchery gets on my nerves." Stryker shielded his eyes with his hands against the glare of sun on water. "You know I can't do that, Arthur. These Arzians may turn out to be Fifth Order beings or higher, and under Terran Regulations our tampering with what may be a basic culture-pattern would amount to armed invasion. We'll have to crack that cackle-and-grunt language of theirs and learn something of their mores before we can interfere." Farrell turned an irritable stare on the incurious group of Arzians gathering, nets and fishing spears in hand, at the edge of the sheltering bramble forest. "What stumps me is their motivation," he said. "Why do the fools go out to that islet every night, when they must know damned well what will happen next morning?" Gibson answered him with an older problem, his square face puzzled. "For that matter, what became of the city I saw when we came in through the stratosphere? It must be a tremendous thing, yet we've searched the entire globe in the scouter and found nothing but water and a scattering of little islands like this one, all covered with bramble. It wasn't a city these pink fishers could have built, either. The architecture was beyond them baffled looks. The city had become something of a fixation with Gibson, and his dogged insistence -- coupled with an irritating habit of being right -- had worn their patience thin. "There never was a city here, Gib," Stryker said. "You dozed off while we were making planetfall, that's all." Gibson stiffened resentfully, but Farrell's voice cut his protest short. "Get set! Here they come!" Out of the morning rainbow dropped a swarm of winged lizards, twenty feet in length and a glistening chlorophyll green in the early light. They stooped like hawks upon the islet offshore, burying the two Arzian fishers instantly under their snapping, threshing bodies. Then around the outcrop the sea boiled whitely, churned to foam by a sudden uprushing of black, octopoid shapes. "The squids," Stryker grunted. "Right on schedule. Two seconds too late, as usual, to stop the slaughter." A barrage of barbed tentacles lashed out of the foam and drove into the melee of winged lizards. The lizards took the air at once, leaving behind three of their number who disappeared under the surface like harpooned seals. No trace remained of the two Arzian natives. "Aheat example of dog eat dog," Farrell said, snapping off the magnoscanner. "Do any of those beauties look like city-builders, Gib?" Chattering pink natives straggled past from the shelter of the thorn forest, ignoring the Earthmen, and lined the casting ledges along the beach to begin their day's fishing. "Nothing we've seen yet could f  !, r   I . iJ Bytfi-tnfuvi Ac: There were two pinkisk bipedal fishermen on the tiny islet  li built that city," Gibson said si iil)bornly. "But it's here someuliere, and I'm going to find it. Will either of you he using the scouter today?" Stryker threw up his hands. "I've a mountain of data to collate, and Arthur is off duty after standing watch last night. Help yourself, but you won't find anything." The scouter was a speeding dot on the horizon when FarreU crawled into his sleeping cubicle a short time later, leaving Stryker to mutter over his litter of notes. Sleep did not come to him at once; a vague sense of something overlooked prodded irritatingly at the back of his consciousness, but it was not until drowsiness had finally overtaken him that the discrepancy assumed definite form. He recalled then that on the first day of the Marco's planetfall one of the pink fishers had fallen from a casting ledge into the water, and had all but drowned before his fellows pulled him out with extended spear-shafts. Which meant that the fishers could not swim, else some would surely have gone in after him. And the Marco's crew had explored Arz exhaustively without finding any slightest trace of boats or of boat landings. The train of association completed itself with automatic logic, almost rousing Farrell out of his doze. "I'll be damned," he muttered. "No boats, and they don't swim. 'I'Ik'ii how the devil do they get out to that islet?" lie fell asleep with the paradox unresolved. over his records when Farrell came out of his cubicle and broke a packaged meal from the food locker. The visicom over the control board hummed softly, its screen blank on open channel. "Gibson found his lost city yet?" Farrell asked, and grinned when Stryker snorted. "He's scouring the daylight side now," Stryker said. "Arthur, I'm going to ground Gib tomorrow, much as I dislike giving him a direct order. He's got that phantom city on the brain, and he lacks the imagination to understand how dangerous to our assignment an obsession of that sort can be." Farrell shrugged. "I'd agree with you offhand if it weren't for Gib's bullheaded habit of being right. I hope he finds it soon, if it's here. I'll probably be standing his watch until he's satisfied." Stryker looked relieved. "Would you mind taking it tonight? I'm completely bushed after today's logging-" Farrell waved a hand and took up his magnoscanner. It was dark outside already, the close, soft night of a moonless tropical world whose moist atmosphere absorbed even starlight. He dragged a chair to the open port and packed his pipe, settling himself comfortably while Stryker mixed a nightcap before turning in. Later he remembered that Stryker dissolved a tablet in his glass, but at the moment it meant nothing. In a matter of minutes the older man's snoring drifted to him, a sound faintly irritating against the velvety hush outside. Farrell lit his pipe and turned to the inconsistencies he had uncovered. The Arzians did not swim, and without boats... It occurred to him then that there had been two of the pink fishers on the islet each morning, and the coincidence made him sit up suddenly, startled. Why two? Why not three or four, or only one? He stepped out through the open lock and paced restlessly up and down on the springy turf, feeling the ocean breeze soft on his face. Three days of dull routine logwork had built up a need for physical action that chafed his temper; he was intrigued and at the same time annoyed by the enigmatic relation that linked the Arzian fishers to the dragons and squids, and his desire to understand that relation was aggravated by the knowledge that Arz could be a perfect world for Terran colonization. That is, he thought wryly, if Terran colonists could stomach the weird custom pursued by its natives of committing suicide in pairs. He went over again the improbable drama of the past three mornings, and found it not too unnatural until he came to the motivation and the means of transportation that placed the Arzians in pairs on the islet, when his whole fabric of speculation fell into a tangled snarl of inconsistencies. He gave it up finally; how could any Earthman rationalize the outlandish compulsions that actuated so alien a race? He went inside again, and the sound of Stryker's muffled snoring fanned his restlessness. He made his decision abruptly, laying aside the magnoscanner for a hand-flash and a pocket-sized audicom unit which he clipped to the belt of his shorts. He did not choose a weapon because he saw no need for one. The torch would show him how the natives reached the outcrop, and if he should need help the audicom would summon Stryker. Investigating without Stryker's sanction was, strictly speaking, a breach of Terran Regulations, but -- "Damn Terran Regulations," he muttered. "I've got to know." Farrell snapped on the torch at the edge of the thorn forest and entered briskly, eager for action now that he had begun. Just inside the edge of the bramble he came upon a pair of Arzians curled up together on the mossy ground, sleeping soundly, their triangular faces wholly blank and unrevealing. He worked deeper into the underbrush and found other sleeping couples, but nothing else. There were no humming insects, no twittering night-birds or scurrying rodents. He had worked his way close to the center of the island without further discovery and was on the point of turning back, disgusted, when something bulky and powerful seized him from behind. A sharp sting burned his shoulder, wasp-like, and a sudden overwhelming lassitude swept him into a darkness deeper than the Arzian night. His last conscious thought was not of his own danger, but of Stryker -- asleep and unprotected behind the Marco's open port...  . H e was standing erect when he woke, his back to the open sea and a prismatic glimmer of h'# I I' il iwn rainbow shining on the u .ill I Ik hue him. For a moment he was totally disoriented; then from the corner of an eye he caught the innkish blur of an Arzian fisher standing beside him, and cried out hoarsely in sudden panic when he ti H 'd to turn his head and could not. He was on the coral outcropping offshore, and except for the involuntary muscles of balance and respiration his body was paralyzed. The first red glow of sunrise blurred the reflected rainbow at his feet, but for some seconds his shuttling mind was too busy to consider the danger of predicament. Whatever brought me here anesthetized me first, he thought. That sting in my shoulder was like a hypo needle. Panic seized him again when he remembered the green flyinglizards; more seconds passed before he gained control of himself, sweating with the effort. He had to get help. If he could switch on the audicom at his belt and call Stryker... He bent every ounce of his will toward raiang his right hand, and failed. His arm was like a limb of lead, its inertia too great to budge. He relaxed the effort with a groan, sweating again when he saw a fiery halfdisk of sun on the water, edges blurred and distorted by tiny surface ripples. On shore he could see the Marco Four resting between thorn forest and beach, its silvered sides glistening with dew. The port was still open, and the empty carrier rack in the bow told him that Gibson had not yet returned with the scouter. He grew aware then that sensation was returning to him slowly, that the cold surface of the audicom unit at his hip -- unfelt before -- was pressing against the inner curve of his elbow. He bent his will again toward motion; this time the arm tensed a little, enough to send hojje flaring through him. If he could put pressure enough against the stud... The tiny click of its engaging sent him faint with relief. "Stryker!" he yelled. "Lee, roll out -- Stryker!" The audicom hummed gently, without answer. He gathered himself for another shout, and recalled with a chill of horror the tablet Stryker had mixed into his nightcap the night before. Worn out by his work, Stryker had made certain that he would not be easily disturbed. The flattened sun-disk on the water brightened and grew rounder. Above its reflected glare he caught a flicker of movement, a restless suggestioa of flapping wings. H e tried again. "Stryker, help me! I'm on the islet!" The audicom crackled. The voice that answered was not Stryker's, but Gibson's. "Farrell! What the devil are you doing on that butcher's block?" Farrell fought down an Insane desire to laugh. "Never mind that -- get here fast, Gib! The flyinglizards -- " He broke off, seeing for the first time the octopods that ringed the outcrop just under the surface of the water, waiting with barbed tentades spread and yellow eyes studying him glassily. He heard the unmistakable flapping of wings behind and above him then, and thought with shock-born lucidity; # wanted a backstage look at this show, and now I'm one of the cast. The scouter roared in from the west across the thorn forest, flashing so close above his head that he felt the wind of its passage. Almost of its emergency bow jets as Gibson met the lizard swarm head on. Gibson's voice came tinnily from the audicom. "Scattered them for the moment, Arthur -- blinded the whole crew with the exhaust, I think. Stand fast, now. I'm going to pick you up." The scouter settled on the outcrop beside Farrell, so close that the hot wash of its exhaust gases scorched his bare legs. Gibson put out thick brown arms and hauled him inside like a straw man, ignoring the native. The scouter darted for shore with Farrell lying across Gibson's knees in tfie cockpit, his head hanging half overside. Farrell had a last dizzy glimpse of the islet against the rush of green water below, and felt his shaky laugh of relief stick in his throat. Two of the octopods were swimming strongly for shore, holding the rigid Arzian native carefully above water between them. "Gib," Farrell croaked. "Gib, can you risk a look back? I think I've gone mad." The scouter swerved briefly as Gibson looked back. "You're all right, Arthur. Just hang on tight. I'll explain everything when we get you safe in the Marco." Farrell forced himself to relax, more relieved than alarmed by the painful pricking of returning sensation. "I might have known it, damn you," he said. "You found your lost city, didn't you?" Gibson sounded a little disgusted, as if he were still angry with himself over some private stupidity. "I'd have found it sooner if I'd had any brains. It was under water, of course." routed Stryker out of his cubicle and mixed drinks around, leaving Farrell comfortably relaxed in the padded control chair. The paralysis was still wearing off slowly, easing Farrell's fear of being permanently disabled. "We never saw the city from the scouter because we didn't go high enough," Gibson said. "I realized that finally, remembering how they used high-altitude blimps during the First Wars to spot submarines, and when I took the scouter up far enough there it was, at the ocean bottom -- a city to compare with anything men ever built." Stryker stared. "A marine city? What use would sea-creatures have for buildings?" "None," Gibson said. "I think the city must have been built ages ago -- by men or by a manlike race, judging from the architecture -- and was submerged later by a sinking of land masses that killed off the original builders and left Arz nothing but an oversized archipelago. The squids took over then, and from all appearances they've developed a culture of their own." "I don't see it," Stryker complained, shaking his head. "The pink fishers -- " "Are cattle, or less," Gibson finished. "The octopods are the dominant race, and they're so far above Fifth Order that we're completely out of bounds here. Under Terran Regulations we can't colonize Arz. It would be armed invasion." "Invasion of a squid world?" Farrell protested, baffled. "Why should surface colonization conflict with an undersea culture, Gib? Why couldn't we share the planet?" "Because the octopods own the islands too, and keep them policed," Gibson said patiently. "They even own the pink fishers. It was one of the squid-people, making a dryland canvass of his preserve here to pick a couple of victims for this morning's show, that carried you oflf last night." "Behold a familiar pattern shaping up," Stryker said. He laughed suddenly, a great irrepressible bellow of sound. "Arz is a squid's world, Arthur, don't you see? And hke most civilized peoples, they're sportsmen. The flying-lizards are the game they hunt, and they raise the pink fishers for -- " Farrell swore in astonishment. "Then those poor devils are put out there deliberately, like worms on a hook -- angling in reverse! No wonder I couldn't spot their motivation!" Gibson got up and sealed the port, shutting out the soft morning breeze. "Colonization being out of the question, we may as well move on before the octopods get curious enough about us to make trouble. Do you feel up to the acceleration, Arthur?" Farrell and Stryker looked at each other, grinning. Farrell said; "You don't think I want to stick here and be used for bait again, do you?" He and Stryker were still grinning over it when Gibson, unamused, blasted the Marco Four free of Arz. (Continued from page #) death. He drove on and on with the heroic patience, triumphs, and disappointments which are the everyday lot of the inquiring mind. Nor was he cut off early, as were temporaries. He died quietly, at the age of seventy-five years, leaving behind a heritage for which the world will be forever grateful. No conceivable force could penetrate Terri's shield. Yet he was defenseless. By Gordon M. IDickson a bit obvious. Terri Mac saw through it before he had taken half a dozen steps into the apartment. A light flush staining his high cheekbones. "This is ridiculous," he said. The light chatter ceased. Cocktail glasses were set down on various handy tables and ledges; and all faces in the room turned toward a man in his late fifties who sat propped up invalid-wise on pillows in a chair in a corner of the room. "The Comptroller is perspicacious," said the old man, agreeably, waving one hand in a casual manner. "On your way, children." And the people present smiled and nodded. Quite as if it were an ordinary leave-taking, they pushed past Terri Mac and filed out the door. Even the blonde, Terri had picked up at the embassy ball and who had brought him here, strolled off casually, but in a decidedly less drunken fashion than she had exhibited earlier in the evening. "Sit down," said the old man. Terri Mac did so, gazing searchingly at the skinny frame and white eyebrows in an unsuccessful effort to connect him with something in memory. "This is ridiculous," he repeated. "Really?" The old man smiled benignly. "And why so?" "Why -- " the situation was so obvious that Terri fumbled -- a little at a loss for words. "Obviously you intend some form of coercion, or else you would have come to me along recognized channels. And any thought of coercion is obviously -- well, ridiculous." "Why?" "Why? You senile old fool, don't you know that Tm shielded? Don't you know all government officials from the fifth class up wear complete personal shields that are not only crackproof but contain all the necessary elements to support life independently within the shield for more than twenty hours? Don't you know that I'll be missed in two hours at the most and tracked down in less than sixty minutes more? Are you crazy?" The old man chuckled, rubbing dry hands together. He said. "I'm shielded too. You can't get at me. And now the room's shielded. You can't get out of it." Terri stared at him. The initial shock was passing. His own statements anent the completeness of his protection had brought back confidence, and his natural coolness was returning. "What do you want?" he asked, eyeing the other narrowly. "Pleasure of your company," said the old man. "There are some very strong connections between us. Yes, very strong. We must get to know each other personally." had misinterpreted the situation. Relief came, mixed with a certain amount of chagrin at the way in which he allowed himself to show alarm. He had looked ridiculous. He leaned back in the chair and allowed a note of official hauteur and annoyance to creep into his voice. "I see," he said. "You want something?" The old man nodded energetically. "I do. Indeed I do." "And you think you have some kind of a bargaining tool that is useful but might not be so if it became known to official channels." "Well -- " said the old man cautiously. "Don't waste my time," interrupted Terri, harshly. "I'm not an ordinary politician. No man who works his way up to the fifth level of the government is. I didn't get to where I am today by pussy-footing around and I haven't the leisure to spend on people who do. Now what do you want?" The other cackled. "Now, what do you think?" he said, putting one finger to his nose cunningly. "You are old," Terri said. "And therefore cautious. Consequently you would not risk trying to force something from me, but are almost certainly trying to sell me something. Now what do I want? Not the usual things, certainly. Within my position I have all the material things a man could want ; and within my shield I enjoy complete immunity. No one but the Central Bureau, itself, can crack this shield. And no one but they can prevent the conditioned reflex that stops my heart if for some reason the shield should be broached. I have a hold on every man beneath me that prevents him from knifing me in the back. There could be only one thing that I want that you could give me -- " he leaned forward, staring into the deep-pouched eyes -- "and that is a means of getting at the man above me. Am I right?" "No," said the old man. Terri stiffened. "No?" he echoed in angry incredulity. Their eyes locked. For a long time they held, and at last Terri looked away. The old man sighed -- sipped noisily from a drink on the table beside his chair. "Wait!" said Terri. To his own surprise, his voice was eager, even a little timorous in its hopefulness. "Wait. I've got it. There will be a test. There always is a test every time a man moves up. His superiors watch him when he doesn't suspect it. It will be that way for me when I am ready for the fourth level. And you have some kind of advance information. You know what the test will be. Maybe you know the man who will administer it. You want to sell me this information." The other said nothing. "Well," Terri spread his hands openly. "I am interested. I'll buy. What do you want. Money? A favor? Protection?" "No." "No?" Terri shouted, starting up from his chair. "What do you mean by no? Can't you say anything but 'no'?" A rage possessed him. He flung himself forward two furious steps to stand threateningly over the aged figure. "You doddering idiot! Say what you want, and quickly! My two hours are nearly up. I'll be missed. They'll be here in a few minutes -- the Bureau Guards. They'll crack the room shield. They'll rescue me. And they'll take you into custody. To be questioned. To be executed. At my order. Do you understand? Your life depends on me." After a little, the old man chuckled again. "Yes," he muttered, in a high-pitched old voice. "That's the way it'll be." Terri stared at him. "You don't seem to understand. You're going to die." "Oh yes," said the old man, nodding his head indulgently. "I'll die. But I'm an old man. I'd die anyway in a year or so -- maybe in a day or so. But for you -- for a young man like you -- the up and coming young governmental with everything to lose -- " he leered slyly at Terri. "Your death won't be so easy for you to take." "I die?" echoed Terri, stupefied. "But I'm not going to die. They're coming to rescue me." "Oh, are they?" said the old man, ironically. "Of course!" said Terri. "Of course, why shouldn't they?" The old man winked one faded eye portentously. "Fine young man," he said. "Up Never a thought for the people he trampled on the way up the ladder. Dear me, no." "What do you mean?" said Terri. The old eyes, looking up suddenly, pierced him. "Do you remember Kilaren?" "K-Kilaren?" "Kilaren," recited the old man as if quoting from a newspaper. "The beautiful young secretary of a provincial governor whose lecherous and unnatural pursuit drove her to suicide. So that one day to escape the governor, she jumped or fell from a high window. And the people of the province, who had for a long time heard ugly stories and rumors, finally mobbed the office and lynched the governor, hanging him from the same window from which the girl had jumped. They said that even the fall had not spoiled her beauty, but that was probably false." The old man's words dwindled away into silence. I what of it?" said Terri. I I . it's that to do with me?" "Why, you were there. You were the governor's aide, and when the mob had gone home and feeling had slackened off, you stepped into the gap and seized up the reins of government, handling matters so skillfully that you were immediately promoted to an under-post at Government City." "What of it?" "Why it was all your doing," replied the other, in a mildly reproving voice, "the rumors, the stories, the mob, even the suicide. Poor Kilaren -- a pitiful pawn in your ruthless game to eliminate the governor in your mad dash up the ladder." "I never touched her!" cried Terri, his voice cracking. "I swear it." "Who said you did? The type of mind that stoops to murder would never have gotten you this far. But you were the one who hired her, knowing the governor's tendencies. You were the one that gave her work that kept her, night after night, alone with the man. You preyed upon her fear of losing her job. You threw the sin in her face after she had committed it. You told her what she might have been, and what she was, and what she would be. You broke her, day after day. In the sterile privacy of the office you reviled her, scorned her, brought her to believe that she was what she was not, a creature of filth and dishonor. You blocked off all avenues of escape but the one that led through one high window. You killed her!" "No!" "Yes!" T erri brought his quivering hands together and clenched them in his lap. He stared at the old man. "Who are you?" "I was a friend of hers. We lived in the same hotel-apartment. She had no family. I believe you knew that when you hired her." "I see," said Terri. He drew a long, deep, shuddering breath, and leaned back in the chair. "So that's the story," he said, his voice strengthening, "I might have known it. Blackmail. There are always fools that want to try blackmail." "No," said the old man. "Not Blackmail, Comptroller. I want your life." Terri laughed shortly, contemptuously. "No knowledge that you have can threaten my life." "They will come," said the old man, leaning wearily back against his cushions. "As you said, the Bureau Guards will come; and I think I shall kill myself when I hear them starting to crack the shield around this room. They will come in and find you with a dead man. What will you tell them, Terri?" "Tfell them? Anything I choose. They won't question me." "No. The guards won't. But the Bureau will. How can they raise a man to the fourth level when there is a two-hour mystery in his backr ground? They will want to know what you were doing here." "I was kidnaped," said Terri. "By whom? Can you prove it? And why?" "I've been held a prisoner here." "By a dead man? No, no, Terri. The circumstances are suspicious. You walk away from the embassy under your own power. You disappear and are found in a shielded room with a man who has committed suicide. This must be explained, and in the end you will have to tell them the truth." "And what if I do?" said Terri, truculently. "But the truth is so fantastic, Terri. So uncheckable. I am dead, and I am the only one who could have supported your story. These people who were here when you came in are common actors. They have no idea why I wanted you decoyed here. These are my rooms. And there is no obvious connection between me and the dead Kilaren. And perhaps I will decide to live just long enough to denounce you as a traitor when they enter." Ashen-faced, Terri stared. "The Bureau will have to question you. They will clamp a block on your mind so that you can't operate the reflex that stops your heart. And they will question you over and over again, because the Bureau cannot afford to take chances. You will go into a private hell of your own, Terri Mac. You will tell the story of your own evil to that girl over and over again, pleading to be believed. And they will not believe you. And in the end they will kill you, just to be on the safe side. Because, you see, you might have been doing something traitorous in these two shielded hours." Terri's head bobbed limply, like a drunken man's. He made one last effort. "Why?" he said. "Why do you do this? Your life. For a girl who was no connection to you?" The old man folded his hands. "I was a little like your governor," he said. "We all have our sins. I loved Kilaren and the shock of her death wrecked my health." He cocked his head suddenly on one side. "Listen," he said. From beyond the clos('d door of the room, a high-pitched humming was barely audible. It grew in volume, going up the scale. Terri leaped to his feet; and for the space of a couple of seconds, he lunged first this way then that, like a wild animal beating against its trap. Then, as if all will had at last gone out of him, he stopped in the middle of the room and closed his eyes. For a fraction of a moment he stood there, before a faint convulsion seixed him and he fell. With a faint smile on his face, the old man reached out to a hidden switch and cut the shield about the room. Uniformed guards tumbled through the door, to pull up in dismay at the sight of the body on the floor. "I'm sorry," said the old man, "I must have turned the shield on by mistake. I was trying to signal someone. The Comptroller seems to have had a heart attack." LunaticDetector cal machine used widely in analyzing mental and physical illnesses. Essentially, it is nothing more than a very sensitive amplifier fitted with electrodes which, placed against the patient's skull, are capable of picking up the minute "brain-waves" to which the electrical activity of the brain constantly gives rise. These brain waves may be reproduced on an oscilloscope like that of a television tube, or they may be photographed, or they may be charted on graph paper. Medical investigators admit the usefulness of the electroencephalograph but wonder why it can't be used as a "predictor" as well as an analyzer. Detailed study resulting from this suggestion has determined that, not only can the electroencephalograph analyze mental flaws, but it can also detect them in advance of their occurrence! The uses of this, of course, suggest themselves automatically. How all-important it is to detect the beginnings of a mental crack-up in individuals who have great responsibility, particularly where lives of people are concerned! Think of what it would mean as a safety factor regarding bus drivers, engineers, airline pilots, executives, or any others who hold in their hands the lives and fortunes of hundreds of people at a time! Such persons should be exposed to encephalographic examination in order to sense or detect the slightest disturbance which might lead them to crack-up while on the job. It is not a matter of determining sanity or insanity ; rather it is purely a matter of detecting strong emotional disturbances which, appearing clearly upon the encephalograph's screen, aid in the prediction of emotional behavior and, possibly, help avert terrible accidents or otber tragedies. Nereid, Satellite of Neptune N ereid, the second Moon of cold, remote Neptune, was discovered only two years ago but already astronomers have managed to plot out its not conventional orbit. The first Moon of Neptune, familiar old Triton, circles the planet at a reasonable distance of about two hundred and twenty thousand miles and in all other respects seems representative of the general system of satellites throughout the Solar System. But Nereid is another matter. The orbit of this little moon apto Neptune and recedes as far as times as long as it is wide, giving an elliptical effect, much like that of a cometary orbit rather than a satellite's. Triton is about the same size as our own Moon, but Nereid has to be different even here. It is only about a fifteenth as massive as Luna. Nereid might be characterized as "a little squib rotating in a drunken orbit." No technical reasons have yet been divined to account for this extreme eccentricity. The formation of such a perverse orbit may indicate that the satellite is a captured sub-planet or it may imply some possibility of collision. Any such theorization awaits much closer observation of the actual path, since Nereid takes not quite an Earthyear to circle its mother planet. Chain Of Waves of newspapers all over the country, so obscure that most readers scarcely noticed it, was an important announcement, an announcement which shows just how far technology has jumped ahead. The micro-wave link between the East and West Coasts has been completed! The first means of communication to use it was the telephone, but the prime purpose of the relay link is, of course, television. The micro-wave ultra-high-frequency radio relaying system is a miracle of applied electronics. All across the country, at intervals of about a hundred miles, are erected two-hundred-foot towers of concrete (to overcome line-ofsight problems) topped by large hornshaped antennas. Each tower is a remotely controlled, automatically operated self-contained receiving and broadcasting station. A program originating in New York travels via these tight beams of high-frequency radio waves from tower to tower where, each time, it is picked up, amplified and rebroadcast, all in a fractional thousandth of a second ! The system is highly practical, because the high-frequency radio waves carrying the television impulses are not just broadcast in a circular pattern. Instead, the tremendously directional antennas, like gridded horns, about ten feet on a side, focus these beams into extremely narrow searchlights, sending them in a straight line to the next tower, where the process is repeated. Some measure of the extreme directivity of the beams can be got from the fact that each tower broadcasts its beam with a power of only one-half watt! When interplanetary travel is finally accomplished, it is a certainty that communication willtake place through micro-waves. An ordinary beam traversing interplanetary space would spread out in far too random a manner, so that no transmitters conceivable could possibly supply the energy But micro-waves using "microwatts" of power could do this, and hence interplanetary communication over "tight-beam" systems is perfectly feasible. The step from spanning a country to spanning space is easy. The Signal Corps people who bounced radio waves off the Moon were using broad beams in comparison -- which accounts for the enormous amount of power they had to use in the radar apparatus. But, given micro-waves with tight-beam antennas, they'll do the same thing on a flashlight cell's power! . -- Charles Recour I I Dear Editor: Your definition (of science fiction ) as delivered to Marion Fried via the Chat with the Editor -- I disagree with you. I think that the science fiction story IS a basic. It is distinctly different from any other type of fiction. To fit into your basic types, I would loosely put in the problem story. Real science fiction does contain a problem, a problem extrapolated from today's science. And when I say "science" I don't mean only physics or chemistry, but biology, botany, psychiatry, etc. The story then is made up of resolving the problem, or the central character's seeing the problem and finding his place in it. It differs from the ordinary problem story (example: detective "whodunit' story) in that survival is a part of the story. That is, it moves from the philosophical to the actual (actual in relation to the characters) and has a life-or-death meaning. If your definition of a science fiction story is something that is only a kind of background then I can expect IF to publish only those stories dealing with jungles and swords and mortgages altered semantically to "extraterrestrial fastnesses", "portable energy weapons", and "planetary rights". I still think stf is written around a problem, an extrapolated problem. The best way to say it might be: Science fiction Is "What would happen if -- ". You Must have the same beliefs in mind yourself, but got a little muddled semantically while trying to find a deft, one sentence meaning. You named the magazine IF. "If" is what makes science fiction possible. If there were no "If" there would be only ordinary things, no worlds to conquer, no atom to smash, no driving, overwhelming force that shouts down the blazing corridors of time or whispers in the deep of the night: "What would happen if -- " And never mind defining science fiction. Just keep serving it to us. It's largely subjective anyway... -- Dave Hammond Runnemede, New Jersey Dear sirs: Ezra Shaw must have polished off a copy of the "Golden Bough" and decided, without further ado, to set up shop as an anthropologist. His explanation of the cave drawings is mistaken as it is common. Shaw represents the old Animal Magic theory as if it were an agreed upon fact, and actually it is nothing of the sort. At one time it was supposed that all "uncivilized" art had to do with superstition. The western mind could not admit even the possibility of genuine art being produced outside of our own culture matrix. Now we know enough about socalled primitive art to differentiate between types... Though there is "magic" art, it is almost without exception characterized by abstraction, symbolism, and other forms of distortion. Mysticism never expresses itself in realism. The realism of the cave paintings indicates an entirely different sort of mind than that which practices mac. The men who drew those pictures were realists. It is not necessary to investigate other cultures to find the truth of the statement that religious art is always distortionistic. The history of art in our own culture bears this out fully. True, many artists who worked on religious projects were realistic in the extreme, but a study of their lives reveals that they themselves were far from "true believers". True religious art is characterized by the complex surrealism of Bosch or the elongated and warped figures of El Greco... or the African sculpture from which Picasso developed Cubism. Realism is typified by Thomas Eakins, the American who studied anatomy to the point of cutting up bodies. Religious artists are not interested in portraying things as they are, they That is what convinces me that the cave art had little or nothing to do with magic. Why did they work, way back in those days, at such great difficulty? Why does an artist of today go to such trouble to use only the best materials. To make the picture last, of course. The cave man has certainly been successful, if that was his aim. I realize that I am being just as dogmatic in my statements as the "magic" school of thought represented in Shaw's article, but I feel that while his position rests solely on prejudice, mine rests upon obvious observable fact which appears to hold true for all art known. What could be more obvious than that a superstitious painter would paint supernatural pictures, and that only a realist would strive for realism? Our picture of these cave artists needs a good going over with the spotlight of factual analysis, and when, if ever, the results come in, I feel quite sure that those cave artists will be acknowledged as people in the history of mankind. -- Ray Nelson, Chicago, #. Dear Sir; While I am not qualified to criticize the whole article (July Science Briefs)... the presence of one paragraph which I know to be completely erroneous casts serious doubt upon the rest. Consider the following: "The statuary which is today produced by the witch doctors of many of the African and Pacific island tribes..." This statement contains serious distortions. ( I ) In West Africa, most "statuary" is made by wood-carvers, ironworkers, and brass-casters, none of 'linin are "witch doctors" in any  use of the term, and most of whom are full-time specialists in (heir trades -- perhaps professions would be a better word. (#) Throughout the Pacific, wood-carving, the dominant medium for statuary, is done mainly by part-time specialists, although nowhere in the Pacific is specialization as highly developed as it is in Africa. (#) The term "witch doctor" is a term which is no longer part of the vocabulary of anyone with any anthropological training. Having, as it does, derogatory connotations, it is a decidedly misleading term to apply to the native religious specialists of Africa, the Pacific, or any other part of the primitive world. The last point merits some amplification. First of all, while Africans usually believe in witches, those who are believed to be practicing witchcraft are almost invariably outside the conventional religious system of the community. In addition, most African religious ciflts have a degree of sophistication, and the belief systems a reasonable enough inner logic to permit them to be ranked with any of the pantheistic systems of the classical world. We would not apply the term "witch doctor" to priests of the classical pantheistic religions -- or, for that matter, to priests of the Hindu cults -- and there is no more reason to do so in the case of the African religious functionaries. Ree.irding this "statuary," Shaw says: "Invariably obscene and repulsive, the images depicted have unusually fat bodies, with the sexual features exaggerated, and faces blank." This statement conforms exactly to a popular stereotype, and is completely false -- and I say this in full realization of the fact that it is, in part at least, an aesthetic judgment. It is certainly not invariably true, and I doubt that it is true as a whole of more than a few isolated cases. I have seen some lifesized brass-cast heads from Nigeria  which are of considerable age, and  which rival in beauty and sensitivf ity of treatment the best of classic j Greek sculpture. These are admittedly exceptional -- they are not in conformity with the general tradition of West African Art. But the best of West African brass-casting and wood-carving is, by anyone's standards, artistry of a high order. The fact that the artistic conventions which it observes differ from our own should not blind us to the skill and artistry that can be found ' in primitive art. I am, therefore, at a loss conj ceming the identity of the "authori ties" whose judgment it is that "... these figurines are completely lacking in the qualities which make us rate the work of the cave man : painters and draftsmen with the ' best that has ever been done." I'm  sure that were Shaw to examine any significant quantity of African i and Pacific art -- with the eye of a critic rather than that of a layman -- he would readily agree that his "authorides" had not done so themselves before forming their judgments. -- Edward E.LeClair, Jr. American Museum of Natural Histor'f would happen to Earth under a cooling sun instead of an expanding one. With expiring solar energy, our planet would become a of life. Here, the artist envisions New York harbor under such conditions. such fascinating features as Adventures in Words, Your Favorite Quiz, Great Ncknes You Should Know and other delightful brain teasers... For this wonderful excursion into puzzle pleasure, just ask your nearest news dealer. It's only # cents -- at all newsstands!  .v WV directed by base radio control and radar, leave their launching racks in pursuit of a foreign craft which has failed to acknowledge radio communications and identify itself. With their nose cameras they will send a televised image of the craft back to the defense base. If the craft is hostile, the missiles are directed to destroy it. Time: dawn. First hard sun rays hit crater peaks; Earth still lights base. Now turn to inside back cover. All Stories New and Complete Cover: Landing on Deirnus By Ken Fagg IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, In. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn Publishing Co., Inc. Office of publication, # Lord Street, Buffalo, New York. Entered as Second Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction; any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. Not responsible for unsolicited artwork or manuscripts. #c. a copy. Printed in U.S. A. Next issue on sale March #th # I #  #  # j # I # r #  #I I #  # I #  #  Moon I fiction magazine called IF was born and appeared quietly and unheralded on the newsstands. With this issue, that magazine is one year old. Actually, this is the first issue of the second year. Now, in the light of other magazines with tenures of # or # or even five years, a first birthday isn't particularly important. But it is somewhat significant in the case of IF, because it seems to indicate -- after a year of slow, steady growth -- that the infant is going to live. During the past year we have worked hard to make each succeeding issue one of improvement. We have tried to secure better stories, better artwork, better editorial effort in producing a more interesting, more attractive science fiction magazine for your entertainment. And when we compare Volume #, Number I with Volume #, Number #, we feel a certain amount of satisfaction. Not that the ultimate has been achieved by a long, long shot. Not that this issue represents the best we can do. But because we have learned and progressed with each succeeding issue and feel that this issue is an improvement over the first six. And the fact that circulation has responded to such nourishment seems to indicate that you , too, think it is improving. So this is IF's first birthday, and don't think we haven't walked the floor at night with it, incurred some sweet headaches and magnificent hangovers. We've had some wonderful fun, too. Also -- we've found that a lot of swell people were willing to help with the feeding, the burping and diaper changing. Artists and writers and agents have printers have been patient and understanding; the engravers always ready with a helping hand ; the paper makers always prompt; some of the best circulation guys to ever handle a magazine have bent over backwards to put the baby out where you can see it; and you, sweet reader, have been indulgent to plunk down thirty-five cents in coin of the realm to take a look at the brat... All in all, a lot of nice people have had a hand in helping the infant IF learn to walk. Another year of this sort of attention and the kid'll be climbing fences! stories in IF's young life is appearing in the next issue. It's called Jupiter Five and was written by Arthur C. Clarke, Chairman of the British Interplanetary Society. One of the world's authorities on the subject, Mr. Clarke has a month, friendly style of writing that lends to a space adventure the easy familiarity of a walk around the block. His Exploration of Space was a Book-of-the-Month Club selection last fall. Ken Fagg, cover artist for this issue, is (as this is written) reading the manuscript of Jupiter Five for a cover idea. Mr. Fagg, who recently caught the science fiction bug, is now a leading artist in other fields and it's a pretty safe bet he'll soon be among the top artists in science fiction. portunity to meet personally a large representation of the real fandom of science fiction -- a bunch of guys and gals who got to Chicago via train, bus, plane, auto, boat and pogo-stick to attend the #th World Science Fiction Convention. And I was really amazed to see the hundreds of young folks so keenly (and rabidly) interested in science fiction. I had the pleasant experience of talking with quite a few and I found each one eager, alert, and wise as to what was happening in the world of science fiction. Many of them could tell you what illustration appeared on what page of such and such magazine in an issue that must have been published while they were about the same age as IF. They knew the latest stories, and the authors, when and where they appeared, and would tell you, without mincing words, what they thought of them. At the auction, a lot of them hocked the family homestead to take home a cover painting, an interior illustration or a manuscript. These young people (I'm not including the pros, the editors, agents, authors, etc.) came them saved their own hard-earned cash for a year in order to make the trip. Unlike a business or political convention, they didn't stand to make money on this deal, they did it because they were crazy about science fiction. One who seemed to me to typify the spirit of the convention is a gangling, blond, bespectacled young man of nineteen named Jim Webbert. He is one of those who had been feeding the piggy bank for a year in order to make the trip -- and believe me, brother, he wasn't going to miss a trick. He knew more about what was going on and where than the whole staff of house dicks ; he was up and down the hotel more than the elevators, and he could tell practically anybody what kind of cigarette he smoked, whether he preferred tea to coffee, and what his particular niche in science fiction happened to be. Jim lives in Salt Lae City, Utah, is a senior in college, where he is majoring in chemical engineering, and during the summer he has been working as a meter reader to earn expenses. While in high school he started reading science fiction -- which decided him on chemical engineering as a career. I don't think it requires much of a prophet to predict he'll go a long way. So I'm glad I met these young people who represent science fiction fandom. I'm glad they live in America. I'm glad I'm working on a science fiction magazine. -- jlq You're all alone in a deserted city. You walk down an empty street, yearning for the sight of one living face -- one moving figure. T hen you see a man on a corner and you know your terror has only begun. plodding knee-deep through the thick stuff of nightmares. There was no definite line between the dream-state and wakefulness. Only a dawning knowledge that he was finally conscious and would have to do something about it. He opened his eyes, but this made no difference. The blackness remained. The pain in his head brightened and he reached up and found the big lump they'd evidently put on his head for good measure -- a margin of safety. They must have been prudent people, because the bang on the head had hardly been necessary. The spiked drink which they had given him would have felled an ox. He remembered going down into the darkness after drinking it, and of knowing what it was. He remembered the helpless feeling. It did not worry him now. He was a philosophical person, and the fact he was still alive cancelled out the drink and its result. He thought, with savor, of the chestnut-haired girl who had watched him take the drink. She had worn a very low bodice, and that was where his eyes had been at the last moment -- on the beautiful, tanned breasts -- until they'd wavered and puddled into a blur and then into nothing. The chestnut-haired girl had been nice, but now she was gone and there were more pressing problems. He sat up, his hands behind him at the ends of stiff arms clawing into long-undisturbed dust and filth. His movement stirred the dust and it rose into his nostrils. He straightened and banged his head against a low ceiling. The pain made him sick for a minute and he sat down to regain his senses. He cursed the ceiling, as a matter of course, in an agonized whisper. Ready to move again, he got onto his hands and knees and crawled cautiously forward, exploring as he went. His hand pushed through cobwebs and found a rough, cement wall. He went around and around. It was all cement -- all solid. Hell! They hadn't sealed him up in this place! There had been a way in so there had to be a way out. He went around again. Then he tried the ceiling and found the opening -- a wooden trap covering a four-by-four hole -- covering it snugly. He pushed the trap away and daylight streamed in. He raised himself up until he was eyelevel with a discarded shaving cream jar lying on the bricks of an alley. He could read the trade mark on the jar, and the slogan: "For the Meticulous Man". He pulled himself up into the alley. As a result of an orderly childhood, he replaced the wooden trap and kicked the shaving cream jar against a garbage can. He rubbed his chin and looked up and down the alley. It was high noon. An uncovered sun blazed down to tell him this. And there was no one in sight. the nearer mouth of the alley. He had been in that hole a long time, he decided. This conviction came from his hunger and the heavy growth of beard he'd sprouted. Twenty-four hours -- maybe longer. That mickey must have been a lulu. He walked out into the cross street. It was empty. No people -- no cars parked at the curbs -- only a cat washing its dirty face on a tenement stoop across the street. He looked up at the tenement windows. They stared back. There was an empty, deserted look about them. The cat flowed down the front steps of the tenement and away toward the rear and he was truly alone. He rubbed his harsh chin. Must be Sunday, he thought. Then he knew it could not be Sunday. He'd gone into the tavern on a Tuesday night. That would make it five days. Too long. He had been walking and now he was at an intersection where he could look up and down a new street. There were no cars -- no people. Not even a cat. A sign overhanging the sidewalk said: Restaurant. He went in under the sign and tried the door. It was locked. There were no lights inside. He turned away -- grinning to reassure himself. Everything was all right. Just some kind of a holiday. In a big city like Chicago the people go away on hot summer holidays. They go to the beaches and the parks and sometimes you can't see a living soul on the streets. And of course you can't find any cars because the people use them to drive to the beaches and the parks and out into the country. He breathed a little easier and started walking again. Sure -- that was it. Now what the hell holiday was it? He tried to remember. He couldn't think of what holiday it could be. Maybe they'd dreamed up a new one. He grinned at that, but the grin was a little tight and he had to force it. He forced it carefully until his teeth showed white. Pretty soon he would come to a section where everybody hadn't gone to the beaches and the parks and a restaurant would be open and he'd get a good meal. A meal? He fumbled toward his pockets. He dug into them and found a handkerchief and a button from his cuff. He remembered that the button had hung loose so he'd pulled it off to keep from losing it. He hadn't lost the button, but everything else was gone. He scowled. The least they could have done was to leave a man eating money. He turned another corner -- into another street -- and it was like the one before. No cars -- no people -- not even any cats. Panic welled up. He stopped and whirled around to look behind him. No one was there. He walked in a tight circle, looking in all directions. Windows stared back at him -- eyes that didn't care where everybody had gone or when they would come back. The windows could wait. The windows were not hungry. Their heads didn't ache. They weren't scared. He began walking and his path veered outward from the sidewalk until he was in the exact center of the silent street. He walked down the worn white line. When he got to the next corner he noticed that the traffic signals were not working. Black, empty eyes. His pace quickened. He walked faster -- ever faster until he was trotting on the brittle pavement, his sharp steps echoing against the buildings. Faster. Another corner. And he was running, filled with panic, down the empty street. stared at the ceiling. The ceiling was a blur but it began to clear as her mind cleared. The ceiling became a surface of dirty, cracked plaster and there was a feeling of dirt and squalor in her mind. It was always like that at these times of awakening, but doubly bitter now, because she had never expected to awaken again. She reached down and pulled the wadded sheet from beneath her legs and spread it over them. She looked at the bottle on the shabby bedtable. There were three sleeping pills left in it. The girl's eyes clouded with resentment. You'd think seven pills would have done it. She reached down and took the sheet in both hands and drew it taut over her stomach. This was a gesture of frustration. Seven hadn't been enough, and here she was again -- awake in the world she'd wanted to leave. Awake with the necessary edge of determination gone. She pulled the sheet into a wad and threw it at the wall. She got up and walked to the window and looked out. Bright daylight. She wondered how long she had slept. A long time, no doubt. Her naked thigh pressed against the windowsill and her bare stomach touched the dirty pane. Naked in the window, but it didn't matter, because it gave onto an airshaft and other windows so caked with grime as to be of no value as windows. But even aside from that, it didn't matter. It didn't matter in the least. She went to the washstand, her bare feet making no sound on the worn rug. She turned on the faucets, but no water came. No water, and she had a terrible thirst. She went to the door and had thrown the bolt before she remembered again that she was naked. She turned back and saw the halfempty Pepsi-Cola bottle on the floor beside the bed table. Someone else had left it there -- how many nights ago? -- but she drank it anyhow, and even though it was flat and warm it soothed her throat. She bent over to pick up garments from the floor and dizziness came, forcing her to the edge of the bed. After a while it passed and she got her legs into one of the garments and pulled it on. Taking cosmetics from her bag, she went again to the washstand and tried the taps. Still no water. She combed her hair, jerking the comb through the mats and gnarls with a satisfying viciousness. When the hair fell into its natural, blond curls, she applied powder and lipstick. She went back to the bed, picked up her brassiere and began putting it on as she walked to the cracked, full-length mirror in the closet door. With the brassiere in place, she stood looking at her slim image. She assayed herself with complete impersonality. She shouldn't look as good as she did -- not after the beating she'd taken. Not after the long nights and the days and the years, even though the years did not add up to very many. I could be someone's wife, she thought, with wry humor. I could be sending kids to school and going out to argue with the grocer about the tomatoes being too soft. I don't look bad at all. She raised her eyes until they were staring into their own images in the glass and she spoke aloud in a low, wondering voice. She said, "Who the hell am I, anyway? Who am I? A body named Linda -- that's who I am. No -- that's what I am. A body's not a who -- it's a what. One hundred and fourteen pounds of well-built blond body called Linda -- model #I -- no fender dents -- nice paint job. Come in and drive me away. Price tag -- " She bit into the lower lip she'd just finished reddening and turned quickly to walk to the bed and wriggle into her dress -- a gray and green cotton -- the only one she had. She picked up her bag and went to the door. There she stopped to turn and thumb her nose at the three sleeping pills in the bottle before she went out and closed the door after herself. The desk clerk was away from the cubbyhole from which he presided over the lobby, and there were no loungers to undress her as she walked toward the door. Nor was there anyone out in the street. The girl looked north and south. No cars in sight either. No buses waddling up to the curb to spew out passengers. The girl went five doors north and tried to enter a place called Tim's Hamburger House. As the lock held and the door refused to open, she saw that there were no lights on inside -- no one behind the counter. The place was closed. She walked on down the street followed only by the lonesome sound of her own clicking heels. All the stores were closed. All the lights were out. All the people were gone. place of concealment of the Chicago Avenue police station was very small -- merely an indentation low in the cement wall behind two steam pipes. The big man had lain in this niche for forty-eight hours. He had slugged a man over the turn of a card in a poolroom pinochle game, had been arrested in due course, and was awaiting the disposal of his case. He was sorry he had slugged the man. He had not had any deep hatred for him, but rather a rage of the moment that demanded violence as its outlet. Although he did not consider it a matter of any great importance, he did not look forward to the six month's jail sentence he would doubtless be given. His opportunity to hide in the niche had come as accidentally and as suddenly as his opportunity to slug his card partner. It had come after the prisoners had been advised of the crisis and were being herded into vans for transportation elsewhere. He had snatched the opportunity without giving any consideration whatever to the crisis. Probably because he did not have enough imagination to fear anything -- however terrible -- which might occur in the future. And because he treasured his freedom above all else. Freedom for today, tomorrow could take care of itself. Now, after forty-eight hours, he writhed and twisted his huge body out of the niche and onto the floor of the furnace room. His legs were numb and he found that he could not stand. He managed to sit up and was able to bend his back enough so his great hands could reach his legs and begin to massage life back into them. So elementally brutal was this man that he pounded his legs until they were black and blue, before feeling returned to them. In a few minutes he was walking out of the furnace room through a jail house which should now be utterly dented. But was it? He went slowly, eliding along close to the walls to reach the front door unchallenged. I Ie walked out into the street. It was daylight and the street was completely deserted. The man took a deep breath and grinned. "I'll be damned," he muttered. "I'll be double and triple damned. They're all gone. Every damn one of them run off like rats and I'm the onlyone left. I'll be damned!" A tremendous sense of exultation seized him. He clenched his fists and laughed loud, his laugh echoing up the street. He was happier than he had ever been in his quick, violent life. And his joy was that of a child locked in a pantry with a huge chocolate cake. He rubbed a hand across his mouth, looked up the street, began walking. "I wonder if they took all the whisky with them," he said. Then he grinned; he was sure they had not. He began walking in long strides toward Clark Street. In toward the still heart of the empty city. little man, and very dangerous. He was also very clever. Eventually they would have found out, but he had been clever enough to deceive them and now they would never know. There was great wealth in his family, and with the rest of them occupied with leaving the city and taking what valuables they could on such short notice, he had been put in charge of one of the chauffeurs. The chauffeur had been given the responsibility of getting the pale-skinned young man out of the city. But the young man had caused several delays until all the rest were gone. Then, meekly enough, he had accompanied the chauffeur to the garage. The chauffeur got behind the wheel of the last remaining car -- a Cadillac sedan -- and the young man had gotten into the rear seat. But before the chauffeur could start the motor, the young man hit him on the head with a tire bar he had taken from a shelf as they had entered the garage. The bar went deep into the chauffeur's skull with a solid sound, and thus the chauffeur found the death he was in the very act of fleeing. The young man pulled the dead chauffeur from the car and laid him on the cement floor. He laid him down very carefully, so that he was in the exact center of a large square of outlined cement with his feet pointing straight north and his outstretched arms pointing south. The young man placed the chauffeur's cap very carefully upon his chest, because neatness pleased him. Then he got into the car, started it, and headed east toward Lake Michigan and the downtown section. After traveling three or four miles, he turned the car off the road and drove it into a telephone post. Then he walked until he came to some high weeds. He lay dowft in the weeds and waited. He knew there would probably be a last vanguard of militia hunting for stragglers. If they saw a moving car they would investigate. They would take him into custody and force him to leave the city. This, he felt, they had no right to do. All his life he had been ordered about -- told to do this and that and the other thing. Stupid orders from stupid people. Idiots who went so far as to claim the whole city would be destroyed, just to make people do as they said. God! The ends to which stupid people would go in orpeople. The young man lay in the weeds and dozed off, his mind occupied with the pleasant memory of the tire iron settling into the skull of the chauffeur. After a while he awoke and heard the cars of the last vanguard passing down the road. They stopped, inspected the Cadillac and found it serviceable. They took it with them, but they did not search the weeds along the road. When they had disappeared toward the west, the young man came back to the road and began walking east, in toward the city. Complete destruction in two days? Preposterous. The young man smiled. hours she had walked the streets of the empty city and the fear, strengthened by weariness, was now mounting toward terror. "One face," she whispered. "Just one person coming out of a house or walking across the street. That's all I ask. Somebody to tell me what this is all about. If I can find one person, I won't be afraid any more." And the irony of it struck her. A few hours previously she had attempted suicide. Sick of herself and of all people, she had tried to end her own life. Therefore, by acknowledging death as the answer, she should now have no fear whatever of anything. Reconciled to crossing the bridge into death, no facet of life should have held terror for her. But the empty city did hold terror. One face -- one moving form was all she asked for. Then, a second irony. When she saw the man at the corner of Washington and Wells, her terror increased. They saw each other at almost the same moment. Both stopped and stared. Fingers of panic ran up the girl's spine. The man raised a hand and the spell was broken. The girl turned and ran, and there was more terror in her than there had been before. She knew how absurd this was, but still she ran blindly. What had she to fear? She knew all about men; all the things men could do they had already done to her. Murder was the ultimate, but she was fresh from a suicide attempt. Death should hold no terrors for her. She thought of these things as the man's footsteps sounded behind her and she turned into a narrow alley seeking a hiding place. She found none and the man turned in after her. She found a passageway, entered with the same blindness which had brought her into the alley. There was a steel door at the end and a brick lying by the sill. The door was locked. She picked up the brick and turned. The man skidded on the filthy alley surface as he turned into the areaway. The girl raised the brick over her head. "Keep away! Stay away from me!" "Wait a minute! Take it easy. I'm not going to hurt you!" "Get away!" Her arm moved downward. The man rushed in and caught her wrist. The brick went over his shoulder and the nails of her other hand raked his face. He seized her without regard for niceties and they went to the ground. She fought with everything she had and he methodically neutralized all her weapons -- her hands, her legs, her teeth -- until she could not move. "Leave me alone. Please!" "What's wrong with you? I'm not going to hurt you. But I'm not going to let you hit me with a brick, either!" "What do you want? Why did you chase me?" "Look -- I'm a peaceful guy, but I'm not going to let you get away. I spent all afternoon looking for somebody. I found you and you ran away. I came after you." "I haven't done anything to you." "That's silly talk. Come on -- grow up! I said I'm not going to hurt you." "Let me up." "So you can run away again? Not for a while. I want to talk to you." "I -- I won't run. I was scared. I don't know why. You're hurting me." He got up -- gingerly -- and lifted her to her feet. He smiled, still holding both her hands. "I'm sorry. I guess it's natural for you to be scared. My name's Frank Brooks. I just want to find out what the hell happened to this town." He let her withdraw her hands, but he still blocked her escape. She moved a pace backward and straightened her clothing. "I don't know what happened. I was looking for someone too." He smiled again. "And then you ran. "I don't know why. I guess -- " "What's your name." "Nora -- Nora Spade." "You slept through it too?" "Yes... yes. I slept through it and came out and they were all gone." "Let's get out of this alley." He preceded her out, but he waited for her when there was room for them to walk side by side, and she did not try to run away. That phase was evidently over. "I got slipped a mickey in a tavern," Frank Brooks said. "Then they slugged me and put me in a hole." His eyes questioned. She felt their demand and said, "I was -- asleep in my hotel room." "They overlooked you?" "I guess so." "Then you don't know anything about it?" "Nothing. Something terrible must have happened." "Let's go down this way," Frank said, and they moved toward Madison Street. He had taken her arm and she did not pull away. Rather, she walked invitingly close to him. She said, "It's so spooky. So... empty. I guess that's what scared   # me. "It would scare anybody. There must have been an evacuation of some kind." "Maybe the Russians are going to drop a bomb." Frank shook his head. "That wouldn't explain it. I mean, the Russians wouldn't let us know ahead of time. Besides, the army would be here. Everybody wouldn't be gone." "There's been a lot of talk about germ warfare. Do you suppose the water, maybe, has been poisoned?" He shook his head. "The same thing holds true. Even if they moved the people out, the army would be here." "I don't know. It just doesn't make sense." "It happened, so it has to make sense. It was something that came up all of a sudden. They didn't have much more than twenty-four hours." He stopped suddenly and looked at her. "We've got to get out of here!" Nora Spade smiled for the first time, but without humor. "How? I haven't seen one car. The buses aren't running." His mind was elsewhere. They had started walking again. "Funny I didn't think of that before." "Think of what?" "That anybody left in this town is a dead pigeon. The only reason they'd clear out a city would be to get away from certain death. That would mean death is here for anybody that stays. Funny. I was so .busy looking for somebody to talk to that I never thought of that." "I did." "Is that what you were scared of?" "Not particularly. I'm not afraid to die. It was something else that scared me. The aloneness, I guess." "We'd better start walking west -- out of the city. Maybe we'll find a car or something." "I don't think we'll find any cars." He drew her to a halt and looked into her face. "You aren't afraid at all, are you?" She thought for a moment. "No, I guess I'm not. Not of dying, that is. Dying is a normal thing. But I was afraid of the empty streets -- nobody around. That was weird." "It isn't weird now?" "Not -- not as much." "I wonder how much time we've got?" Nora shrugged. "I don't know, but I'm hungry." "We can fix that. I broke into a restaurant a few blocks back and got myself a sandwich. I think there's still food around. They couldn't take it all with them." They were on Madison Street and they turned east on the south side of the street. Nora said, "I wonder if there are any other people still here -- like us?" "I think there must be. Not very many, but a few. They would have out overnight. It stands to reason they must have missed a few. Did you ever try to empty a sack of sugar? Really empty it? It's impossible. Some of the grains always stick to the sack." A few minutes later the wisdom of this observation was proven when they came to a restaurant with the front window broken out and saw a man and a woman sitting at one of the tables. shock of black hair and a mouth slightly open showing a set of incredibly white teeth. He waved an arm and shouted, "Come on in! Come on in for crissake and sit down! We got beer and roast beef and the beer's still cold. Come on in and meet Minna." This was different, Nora thought. Not eerie. Not weird, like seeing a man standing on a deserted street corner with no one else around. This seemed normal, natural, and even the smashed window didn't detract too much from the naturalness. They went inside. There were chairs at the table and they sat down. The big man did not get up. He waved a hand toward his companion and said, "This is Minna. Ain't she something? I found her sitting at an empty bar scared to death. We came to an understanding and I brought her along." He grinned at the woman and winked. "We came to a real understanding, didn't we, Minna?" , Minna was a completely colorless woman of perhaps thirty-five. Her skin was smooth and pale and she wore no makeup of any kind. Her hair was drawn straight back into a bun. The hair had no predominating color. It was somewhere between light brown and blond. She smiled a little sadly, but the laugh did not cover her worn, tired look. It seemed more like a gesture of obedience than anything else. "Yes. We came to an understandmg. "I'm Jim Wilson," the big man boomed. "I was in the Chicago Avenue jug for slugging a guy in a card game. They kind of overlooked me when they cleaned the joint out." He winked again. "I kind of helped them overlook me. Then I found Minna." There was tremendous relish in his words. Frank started introductions which Nora Spade cut in on. "Maybe you know what happened?" she asked. Wilson shook his head. "I was in the jug and they didn't tell us. They just started cleaning out the joint. There was talk in the bullpen -- invasion or something. Nobody knew for sure. Have some beer and meat." Nora tumd to the quiet Minna. "Did you hear anything?" "Naw," Wilson said with a kind of affectionate contempt. "She don't know anything about it. She lived in some attic dump and was down with a sore throat. She took some pills or something and when she woke up they were gone." "I went to work and -- " Minna began, but Wilson cut her off. "She swabs out some joints on Chicago Avenue for a living and that was how she happened to be sitting in that tavern. It's payday, and Minna was waiting for her dough!" He exploded into laughter and slapped the table with a huge hand. "Can you beat that? Waiting for her pay at a time like this." Frank Brooks set down his beer bottle. The beer was cold and it tasted good. "Have you met anybody else? There must be some other people around." "Uh-uh. Haven't met anybody but Minna." He turned his eyes on the woman again, then got to his feet. "Come on, Minna. You and I got to have a little conference. We got things to talk about." Grinning, he walked toward the rear of the restaurant. Minna got up more slowly. She followed him behind the counter and into the rear of the place. Alone with Nora, Frank said, "You aren't eating. Want me to look for something else?" "No -- I'm not very hungry. I was just wondering -- " "Wondering about what?" "When it will happen. When whatever is going to happen -- you know what I mean." "I'd rather know what's going to happen. I hate puzzles. It's hell to have to get killed and not know what killed you." "We aren't being very sensible, are we?" "How do you mean?" "We should at least act normal." "I don't get it." Nora frowned in slight annoyance. "Normal people would be trying to reach safety. They wouldn't be sitting in a restaurant drinking beer. We should be trying to get away. Even if it does mean walking. Normal people would be trying to get away." Frank stared at his bottle for a moment. "We should be scared stiff, shouldn't we?" It was Nora's turn to ponder. "I'm not sure. Maybe not. I know I'm not fighting anything inside -- fear, I mean. I just don't seem to care one way or another." "I care," Frank replied. "I care. I don't want to die. But we're faced with a situation, and either way it's a gamble. We might be dead before I finish this bottle of beer. If that's true, why not sit here and be comfortable? Or we might have time to walk far enough to get out of range of whatever it is that chased everybody." "Which way do you think it is?" "I don't think we have time to get out of town. They cleaned it out too fast. We'd need at least four or five hours to get away. If we had that much time the army, or whoever did it, would still be around." "Maybe they didn't know themselves when it's going to happen." He made an impatient gesture. "What difference does it make? We're in a situation we didn't ask to get in. Our luck put us here and I'm damned if I'm going to kick a hole in the ceiling and yell for help." Nora was going to reply, but at that moment Jim Wilson came striding out front. He wore his big grin and he carried another halfdozen bottles of beer. "Minna'll be out in a minute," he said. "Women are always slower than hell." He dropped into a chair and snapped the cap off a beer bottle with his thumb. He held the bottle up and squinted through it, sighing gustily. "Man! I ain't never had it so good." He tilted the bottle in salute, and drank. west now, and when Minna reappeared it seemed that she materialized from the shadows, so quietly did she move. Jim Wilson opened another bottle and put it before her. "Here -- have a drink, baby." Obediently, she tilted the bottle and drank. "What do you plan to do?" Frank asked. "It'll be dark soon," Wilson said. "We ought to go out and try to scrounge some flashlights. I bet the power plants are dead. Probably aren't any flashlights either." "Are you going to stay here?" Nora asked. "Here in the Loop?" He seemed surprised. "Why not? A man'd be a fool to walk out on all this. All he wants to eat and drink. No goddam cops around. The life of Reilly and I should walk out?" "Aren't you afraid of what's going to happen?" "I don't give a good goddam what's going to happen. What the hell! Something's always going to happen." "They didn't evacuate the city for nothing," Frank said. "You mean we can all get killed?" Jim Wilson laughed. "Sure we can. We could have got killed last week too. We could of got batted in the can by a truck anytime we crossed the street." He emptied his bottle, threw it accurately at a mirror over the cash register. The crash was thunderous. "Trouble with you people, you're worry warts," he said with an expansive grin. "Let's go get us some flashlights so we can find our way to bed in one of those fancy hotels." He got to his feet and Minna arose also, a little tired, a little apprehensive, but entirely submissive. Jim Wilson said, "Come on, baby. I sure won't want to lose you." He grinned at the others. "You guys coming?" Frank's eyes met Nora's. He shrugged. "Why not?" he said. "Unless you want to start walking." "I'm too tired," Nora said. As they stepped out through the smashed window, both Nora and Frank half-expected to see other forms moving up and down Madison Street. But there was no one. Only the unreal desolation of the lonely pavement and the dark-windowed buildings. "The biggest ghost town on earth," Frank muttered. Nora's hand had slipped into Frank's. He squeezed it and neither of them seemed conscious of the contact. "I wonder," Nora said. "Maybe this is only one of them. Maybe all the other big cities are evacuated too." Jim Wilson and Minna were walking ahead. He turned. "If you two can't sleep without finding out what's up, it's plenty easy to do." "You think we could find a battery radio in some store?" Frank ciskcd "Hell no! They'll all be gone. But all you'd have to do is snoop around in some newspaper office. If you can read you can find out what happened." It seemed strange to Frank that he had not thought of this. Then he realized he hadn't tried very hard to think of anything at all. He was surprised, also, at his lack of fear. He's gone through life pretty much taking things as they came -- as big a sucker as the next man -- making more than his quota of mistakes and blunders. Finding himself completely alone in a deserted city for the first time in his life, he had naturally fallen prey to sudden fright. But that had gradually passed, and now he was able to accept the new reality fairly passively. He wondered if that wasn't pretty much the way of all people. New situations brought a surge of whatever emotion fitted the picture. Then the emotion subsided and the new thing became the ordinary. This, he decided, was the manner in which humanity survived. Humanity took things as they came. Pile on enough of anything and it becomes the ordinary. Jim Wilson had picked up a garbage box apd hurled it through the window of an electric shop. The glass came down with a crash that shuddered up the empty darkening street and grumbled off into silence. Jim Wilson went inside. "I'll see what I can find. You stay out here and watch for cops." His laughter echoed out as he disappeared. Minna stood waiting silently, unmoving, and somehow she reminded Frank of a dumb animal; an unreasoning creature with no mind of her own, waiting for a signal from her master. Strangely, he resented this, but at the same time could find no reason for his resentment, except the feeling that no one should appear as much a slave as Minna. Jim Wilson reappeared in the window. He motioned to Minna. "Come on in, baby. You and me's got to have a little conference." His exaggerated wink was barely perceptible in the gloom as Minna stepped over the low sill into the store. "Won't be long, folks," Wilson said in high good humor, and the two of them vanished into the darkness beyond. Frank Brooks glanced at Nora, hut her face was turned away. He cursed softy under his breath. He said, "Wait a minute," and went into the store through the huge, jagged opening. Inside, he could barely make out the counters. The place was larger than it had appeared from the outside. Wilson and Minna were nowhere about. Frank found the counter he was looking for and pawed out several flashlights. They were only empty tubes, but he found a case of batteries in a panel compartment against the wall. "Who's there?" "Me. I came in for some flashlights." "Couldn't you w'ait?" "It's getting dark." "You don't have to be so damn impatient." Jim Wilson's voice was hostile and surly. Frank stifled his quick anger. "We'll be outside," he said. He found Nora waiting where he'd left her. He loaded batteries into four flashlights before Jim Wilson and Minna reappeared. Wilson's good humor was back. "How about the Morrison or the Sherman," he said. "Or do you want to get real ritzy and walk up to the Drake?" "My feet hurt," Minna said. The woman spoke so rarely, Frank Brooks was startled by her words. "Morrison's the closest, " Jim Wilson said. "Let's go." He took Minna by the arm and swung off up the street. Frank and Nora fell in behind. Nora shivered. Frank, holding her arm, asked, "Cold?" "No. It's just all -- unreal again." "I see what you mean." "I never expected to see the Loop dark. I can't get used to it." A vagrant, whispering wind picked up a scrap of paper and whirled it along the street. It caught against Nora's ankle. She jerked perceptibly and kicked the scrap away. The wind caught it again and spiralled it away into the darkness. "I want to tell you something," she said. "Tell away." "I told you before that I slept through the -- the evacuation, or whatever it was. That wasn't exactly true. I did sleep through it, but it was my fault. I put myself to sleep." "I don't get it." "I tried to kill myself. Sleeping tablets. Seven of them. They weren't enough." Frank said nothing while they paced off ten steps through the dark canyon that was Madison Street. Nora wondered if he had heard. "I tried to commit suicide." "Why?" "I was tired of life, I guess." "What do you want -- sympathy?" The sudden harshness in his voice brought her eyes around, but his face was a white blur. "No -- no, I don't think so." "Well, you won't get it from me. Suicide is silly. You can have troubles and all that -- everybody has them -- but suicide -- why did you try it?" A high, thin whine -- a wordless vibration of eloquence -- needled out of the darkness into their ears. The shock was like a sudden shower of ice water dashed over their bodies. Nora's fingers dug into Frank's arm, but he did not feel the cutting nails. "We're -- there's someone out there in the street!" T wenty-five feet ahead of where Frank and Nora stood frozen there burst the booming voice of Jim Wilson. "What the hell was that?" And the shock was dispelled. The white circle from Wilson's flash bit out across the blackness to outline movement on the far side of the street. Then Frank Brook's light, and Nora's, went exploring. "There's somebody over there," Wilson bellowed. "Hey, you! Show your face! Quit sneaking around!" Frank's light swept an arc that clearly outlined the buildings across the street and then weakened as it swung westward. There was something or someone back there, but obscured by the dimness. He was swept by a sense of unreality again. "Did you see them?" Nora's light beam had dropped to her feet as though she feared to point it out into the darkness. "I thought I saw something." Jim Wilson was swearing industriously. "There was a guy over there. He ducked around the corner. Some damn fool out scrounging. Wish I had a gun." Frank and Nora moved ahead and the four stood in a group. "Put out your lights," Wilson said. "They make good targets if the jerk's got any weapons." They stood in the darkness, Nora holding tightly to Frank's arm. Frank said, "That was the damndest noise I ever heard." "Like a siren?" Frank thought Jim Wilson spoke hopefully, as though wanting somebody to agree with him. "Not like any I ever heard. Not like a whistle, either. More of a moan." "Let's get into that goddam hotel and -- " Jim Wilson's words were cut off by a new welling-up of the melancholy howling. It had a new pattern this time. It sounded from many places; not nearer, Frank thought, than Lake Street on the north, but spreading outward and backward and growing fainter until it died on the wind. Nora was shivering, clinging to Frank without reserve. Jim Wilson said, "I'll be damned if it doesn't sound like a signal of some kind." "Maybe it's a language -- a way of communication." "But who the hell's communicating?" "How would I know?" "We best get to that hotel and bar a few doors. A man can't fight in the dark -- and nothing to fight with." They hurried up the street, but it was all different now. Gone was the illusion of being alone ; gone the sense of solitude. Around them the ghost town had come suddenly alive. Sinister forces more frightening than the previous solitude had now to be reckoned with. "Something's happened -- something in the last few minutes," Nora whispered. Frank leaned close as they crossed the street to the dark silent pile that was the Morrison hotel. "I think I know what you mean." "It's as though there was no one around and then, suddenly, they came." "I think they came and went away again." "Did you actually see anyone when you flashed your light?" "No -- I can't say positively that I did. But I got the impression there were figures out there -- at least dozens of them -- and that they moved back away from the light. Always just on the edge of it." "I'm scared, Frank." "So am I." "Do you think it could all be imagination?" "Those moans? Maybe the first one -- I've heard of people imagining sounds. But not the last ones. And besides, we all heard them." Jim Wilson, utterly oblivious of any subtle emanations in the air, boomed out in satisfaction: "We don't have to bust the joint open. The revolving door works." "Then maybe we ought to be careful," Frank said. "Maybe somebody else is around here." "Could be. We'll find out." "Why are we afraid?" Nora whispered. "It's natural, isn't it?" Frank melted the beam of his light with that of Jim Wilson. The white finger pierced the darkness inside. Nothing moved. "I don't see why it should be. If there are people in there they must be as scared as we are." Nora was very close to him as they entered. The lobby seemed deserted. The flashlight beams scanned the empty chairs and couches. The glass of the deserted cages threw back reflections. "The keys are in there," Frank said. He vaulted the desk and scanned the numbers under the pigeon holes. "We'd better stay down low," Jim Wilson said. "Damned if I'm going to climb to the penthouse." "How about the fourth floor?" "That's plenty high enough." Frank came out with a handful of keys. "Odd numbers," he said. "Four in a row." "Well I'll be damned," Jim Wilson muttered. But he said no more and they climbed the stairs in silence. They passed the quiet dining rooms and banquet halls, and by the time they reached the fourth floor the doors giving off the corridors had assumed a uniformity. "Here they are." He handed a key to Wilson. "That's the end one." He said nothing as he gave Minna her key, but Wilson grunted, "For crissake!" in a disgusted voice, took Minna's key and threw it on the floor. Frank and Nora watched as Wilson unlocked his door, Wilson turned. "Well, goodnight all. If you get goosed by any spooks, just yell." Minna followed him without a word and the door closed. Frank handed Nora her key. "Lock your door and you'll be safe. I'll check the room first." He unlocked the door and flashed his light inside. Nora was close behind him as he entered. He checked the bathroom. "Everything clear. Lock your door and you'll be safe." "Frank." "Yes?" "I'm afraid to stay alone." "You mean you want me to -- " "There are two beds here." His reply was slow in coming. Nora didn't wait for it. Her voice rose to the edge of hysteria. "Quit being so damned righteous. Things have changed! Can't you realize that? What does it matter how or where we sleep? Does the world care? Will it make a damn bit of difference to the world whether I strip stark naked in front of you?" A sob choked in her throat. "Or would that outrage your morality." He moved toward her, stopped six inches away. "It isn't that. For God's sake! I'm no saint. It's just that I thought you -- " "I'm plain scared, and I don't want to be alone. To me that's all that's important." Her face was against his chest and his arms went around her. But her own hands were fists held together against him until he could feel her knuckles, hard, against his chest. She was crying. "Sure," Frank said. "I'll stay with you. Now take it easy. Everything's going to be all right." Nora sniffled without bothering to reach for ' her handkerchief. "Stop lying. You know it isn't going to be all right." Frank was at somewhat of a loss. This flareup of Nora's was entirely unexpected. He eased toward the place the flashlight had shown the bed to be. Her legs hit its edge and she sat down. "You -- you want me to sleep in the other one?" he asked. "Of course," Nora replied with marked bitterness. "I'm afraid you wouldn't be very comfortable in with me." There was a time of silence. Frank took off his jacket, shirt and trousers. It was funny, he thought. He'd spent his money, been drugged, beaten and robbed as a result of one objective -- to get into a room alone with a girl. And a girl not nearly as nice as Nora at that. Now, here he was alone with a real dream, and he was tongue-tied. It didn't make sense. He shrugged. Life was crazy sometimes. He heard the rustle of garments and wondered how much Nora was taking off. Then he dropped his trousers, forgotten, to the floor. "Did you hear that?" "Yes. It's that -- " Frank went to the window, raised the sash. The moaning sound came in louder, but it was from far distance. "I think that's out around Evanston." Frank felt a warmth on his cheek and he realized Nora was by his side, leaning forward. He put an arm around her and they stood unmoving in complete silence. Although their ears were straining for the sound coming down from the north, Frank could not be oblivious of the warm flesh under his hand. Nora's breathing was soft against his cheek. She said, "Listen to how it rises and falls. It's almost as though they were using it to talk with, The inflection changes." "I think that's what it is. It's coming from a lot of different places. It stops in some places and starts in others." "It's so -- weird." "Spooky," Frank said, "but in a way it makes me feel better." "I don't see how it could." Nora pressed closer to him. "It does though, because of what I was afraid of. I had it figured out that the city was going to blow up -- that a bomb had been planted that they couldn't find, or something like that. Now, I'm pretty to bet we'll be alive in the morning." Nora thought that over in silence. "If that's the way it is -- if some kind of invaders are coming down from the north -- isn't it stupid to stay here? Even if we are tired we ought to be trying to get away from them." "I was thinking the same thing. I'll go and talk to Wilson." They crossed the room together and he left her by the bed and went on to the door. Then he remembered he was in his shorts and went back and got his trousers. After he'd put them on, he wondered why he'd bothered. He opened the door. Something warned him -- some instinct -- or possibly his natural fear and caution coincided with the presence of danger. He heard the footsteps on the carpeting down the hall -- soft, but unmistakably footsteps. He called, "Wilson -- Wilson -- that you?" The creature outside threw caution to the winds. Frank sensed rather than heard a body hurtling toward the door. A shrill, mad laughter raked his ears and the weight of a body hit the door. Frank drew strength from pure panic as he threw his weight against the panel, but perhaps an inch or two from the latch the door wavered from opposing strength. Through the narrow opening he could feel the' hoarse breath of exertion in his face. Insane giggles and curses sounded through the black stillness. Frank had the wild conviction he was losing the battle, and added strength came from somewhere. He heaved and there was a scream and he knew he had at least one finger caught between the door and the jamb. He threw his weight against the door with frenzied effort and heard the squash of the finger. The voice kited up to a shriek of agony, like that of a wounded animal. Even with his life at stake, and the life of Nora, Frank could not deliberately slice the man's fingers off. Even as he fought the urge, and called himself a fool, he allowed the door to give slightly inward. The hand was jerked to safety. At that moment another door opened close by and Jim Wilson's voice boomed : "What the hell's going on out here?" Simultaneous with this, racing footsteps receded down the hall and from the well of the stairway came a whining cry of pain. "Jumping jees!" Wilson bellowed. "We got company. We ain't alone!" "He tried to get into my room." "You shouldn't have opened the door. Nora okay?" "Yeah. She's all right." "Tell her to stay in her room. And you do the same. We'd be crazy to go after that coot in the dark. He'll keep 'til morning." Frank closed the door, doublelocked it and went back to Nora's bed. He could hear a soft sobbing. He reached down and pulled back the covers and the sobbing came louder. Then he was down on the bed and she was in his arms. She cried until the panic subsided, while he held her and said nothing. After a while she got control of herself. "Don't leave me, Frank," she begged. "Please don't leave me." He stroked her shoulder. "I won't," he whispered. They lay for a long time in utter silence, each seeking strength in the other's closeness. The silence was finally broken by Nora. "Frank?" "Yes." "Do you want me?" He did not answer. "If you want me you can have me, Frank." Frank said nothing. "I told you today that I tried to commit suicide. Remember?" "I remember." "That was the truth. I did it because I was tired of everything. Because I've made a terrible mess of things. I didn't want to go on livHe remained silent, holding her. As she spoke again, her voice sharpened. "Can't you understand what I'm telling you? I'm no good! I'm just a bum! Other men have had me! Why shouldn't you? Why should you be cheated out of what other men have had?" He remained silent. After a few moments, Nora said, "For God's sake, talk! Say something!" "How do you feel about it now? Will you try again to kill yourself the next chance you get?" "No -- no, I don't think I'll ever try it again." "Then things must look better." "I don't know anything about that. I just don't want to do it now." She did not urge him this time and he was slow in speaking. "It's kind of funny. It really is. Don't get the idea I've got morals. I haven't. I've had my share of women. I was working on one the night they slipped me the mickey -- the night before I woke up to this tomb of a city. But now -- tonight -- its kind of different. I feel like I want to protect you. Is that strange?" "No," she said quietly. "I guess not." They lay there silently, their thoughts going off into the blackness of the sepulchral night. After a long while, Nora's even breathing told him she was asleep. He got up quietly, covered her, and went to the other bed. But before he slept, the weird wailings from out Evanston way came again -- rose and fell in that strange conversational cadencethen died away into nothing. X gers of daylight. Nora still slept. He dressed and stood for some moments with his hand on the door knob. Then he threw the bolt and cautiously opened the door. The hallway was deserted. At this point it came to him forcibly that he was not a brave man. All his life, he realized, he had avoided physical danger and had refused to recognize the true reason for so doing. He had classified himself as a man who dodged trouble through good sense; that the truly civilized person went out of his way to keep the peace. He realized now that that attitude was merely salve for his ego. He faced the empty corridor and did not wish to proceed further. But stripped of the life-long alibi, he forced himself to walk through the doorway, close the door softly, and move toward the stairs. He paused in front of the door behind which Jim Wilson and Minna were no doubt sleeping. He stared at it wistfully. It certainly would not be a mark of cowardice to get Jim Wilson up under circumstances such as these. In fact, he would be a fool not to do so. Stubbornness forbade such a move, however. He walked softly toward the place where the hallway dead-ended and became a crosscorridor. He made the turn carefully, pressed against one wall. There was no one in sight. He got to the stairway and started down. His muscles and nerves tightened with each step. When he reached the lobby he was ready to jump skyhigh at the drop of a pin. But no one dropped any pins, and he reached the modernistic glass doorway to the drugstore with only silence screaming in his ears. The door was unlocked. One hinge squeaked slightly as he pushed the door inward. It was in the drugstore that Frank found signs of the fourthfloor intruder. An inside counter near the prescription department was red with blood. Bandages and first-aid supplies had been unboxed and thrown around with abandon. Here the man had no doubt administered to his smashed hand. But where had he gone? Asleep, probably, in one of the rooms upstairs. Frank wished fervently for a weapon. Beyond doubt there was not a gun left in the Loop. A gun was not the only weapon ever created, though, and Frank searched the store and found a line of pocket knives still in neat boxes near the perfume counter. He picked four of the largest and found, also, a wooden-handled, lead-tipped bludgeon, used evidently for cracking ice. Thus armed, he went out through the revolving door. He walked through streets that were like death under the climbing sun. Through streets and canyons of dead buildings upon which the new daylight had failed to shed life or diminish the terror of the night past. At Dearborn he found the door to the Tribune Public Service Building locked. He used the ice breaker to smash a glass door panel. The crash of the glass on the cement was an explosion in the screaming silence. He went inside. Here the sense of desolation was complete; brought sharply to focus, probably, by the pigeon holes filled with letters behind the want-ad counter. Answers to a thousand and one queries, waiting patiently for someone to come after them. Before going to the basement and the back files of the Chicago Tribune, Frank climbed to the second floor and found what he thought might be there -- a row of teletype machines with a file-board hooked to the side of each machine. Swiftly, he stripped the copy sheets off each board, made a bundle of them and went back downstairs. He covered the block back to the hotel at a dog-trot, filled with a sudden urge to get back to the fourth floor as soon as possible. He stopped in the drugstore and filled his pockets with soap, a razor, shaving cream and face lotion. As an afterthought, he picked up a lavish cosmetic kit that retailed, according to the price tag, for thirtyeight dollars plus tax. He let himself back into the room and closed the door softly. Nora rolled over, exposing a shoulder and one breast. The breast held his gaze for a full minute. Then a feeling of guilt swept him and he went into the bathroom and closed the door. Luckily, a supply tank on the roof still contained water and Frank was able to shower and shave. Dressed again, he felt like a new man. But he regretted not hunting up a haberdashery shop and getting himself a clean shirt. Nora had still not awakened when he came out of the bathroom. He went to the bed and stood looking down at her for some time. Then he touched her shoulder. "Wake up. It's morning." Nora stirred. Her eyes opened, but Frank got the impression she did not really awaken for several seconds. Her eyes went to his face, to the window, back to his face. "What time is it?" "I don't know. I think it's around eight o'clock." Nora stretched both arms luxuriously. As she sat up, her slip fell back into place and Frank got the impression she hadn't even been ware of her partial nudity. She stared up at him, clarity dawning in her eyes, "You're all i leaned up." "I went downstairs and got some things." "You went out -- alone?" "Why not. We can't stay in here all day. We've got to hit the road and get out of here. We've overshot our luck already." "But that -- that man in the hall last night! You shouldn't have taken a chance." "I didn't bump into him. I found the place he fixed his hand, down in the drugstore." Frank went to the table and came back with the cosmetic set. He put it in Nora's lap. "I brought this up for you." Surprise and true pleasure were mixed in her expression. "That was very nice. I think I'd better get dressed." Frank turned toward the window where he had left the bundle of teletype clips. "I've got a little reading to do." As he sat down, he saw, from the comer of his eye, a flash of slim brown legs moving toward the bathroom. Just inside the door, Nora turned. "Are Jim Wilson and Minna up yet?" "I don't think so." Nora's eyes remained on him. "I think you were very brave to go downstairs alone. But it was a foolish thing to do. You should have waited for Jim Wilson." "You're right about it being foolish. But I had to go." "Why?" "Because I'm not brave at all. Maybe that was the reason." Nora left the bathroom door open about six inches and Frank heard the sound of the shower. He sat with the papers in his hand wondering about the water. When he had gone to the bathroom the thought had never occurred to him. It was natural that it should. Now he wondered about it. Why was it still running? After a while he considered the possibility of the supply tank on the roof. Then he wondered about Nora. It was strange how he could think about her personally and impersonally at the same time. He remembered her words of the previous night. They made her -- he shied from the term. What was the old cliche? A woman of easy virtue. What made a woman of that type, he wondered. Was it something inherent in their makeup? That partially opened door was symbolic somehow. He was sure that many wives closed the bathroom door upon their husbands; did it without thinking, instinctively. He was sure Nora had left it partially open without thinking. Could a behavior pattern be traced from such an insignificant thing? He wondered about his own attitude toward Nora. He had drawn away from what she'd offered him during the night. And yet from no sense of disgust. There was certainly far more about Nora to attract than to repel. Morals, he realized dimly, were imposed -- or at least functioned -- for the protection of society. With society gone -- vanished overnight -- did the moral code still hold? If and when they got back among masses of people, would his feelings toward Nora change? He thought not. He would marry her, he told himself firmly, as quick as he'd marry any other girl. He would not hold what she was against her. I guess I'm just fundamentally unmoral myself, he thought, and began reading the news clips. door accompanied by the booming voice of Jim Wilson. "You in there! Ready for breakfast?" Frank got up and walked toward the door. As he did so, the door to the bathroom closed. Jim Wilson wore a two-day growth of beard and it didn't seem to bother him at all. As he entered the room he rubbed his hands together in great gusto. "Well, where'll we eat, folks? Let's pick the classiest restaurant in town. Nothing but the best for Minna here." He winked broadly as Minna, expressionless and silent, followed him in exactly as a shadow would have followed him and sat primly down in a straight-backed chair by the wall. "We'd better start moving south," Frank said, "and not bother about breakfast." "Getting scared?" Jim Wilson asked. "You're damn right I'm scared -- now. We're right in the middle of a big no-man' s-land." "I don't get you." At that moment the bathroom door opened and Nora came out. Jim Wilson forgot about the question he'd asked. He let forth a loud whistle of appreciation. Then he turned his eyes on Frank and his thought was crystal clear. He was envying Frank the night just passed. A sudden irritation welled up in Frank Brooks, a distinct feeling of disgust. "Let's start worrying about important things -- our lives. Or don't you consider your life very important?" Jim Wilson seemed puzzled. "What the hell's got into you? Didn't you sleep good?" "I went down the block this morning and found some teletype machines. I've just been reading the reports." "What about that guy that tried to get into your room last night?" "I didn't see him. I didn't see anybody. But I know why the city's been cleaned out." Frank went back to the window and picked up the sheaf on clips he had gone through. Jim Wilson sat down on the edge of the bed, frowning. Nora followed Frank and perched on the edge of the chair he dropped into. "The city going to blow up?" Wilson asked. "No. We've been invaded by some form of alien life." "Is that what the papers said?" "It was the biggest and fastest mass evacuation ever attempted. I pieced the reports together. There was hell popping around here during the two days we -- we waited it out." "Where did they all go?" Nora asked. "South. They've evacuated a forty-mile strip from the lake west. The first Terran defense line is set up in northern Indiana." "What do you mean -- Terra." "It's a word that means Earth -- this planet. The invaders came from some other planet, they think -- at least from no place on Earth." ever heard of," Wilson said. "A lot of people probably thought the same thing," Frank replied. "Flying saucers were pretty common. Nobody thought they were anything and nobody paid much attention. Then they hit -- three days ago -- and wiped out every living soul in three little southern Michigan towns. From there they began spreading out. They -- " Each of them heard the sound at the same time. A faint rumble, increasing swiftly into high thunder. They moved as one to the window and saw four jet planes, in formation, moving across the sky from the south. "There they come," Frank said. "The fight's started. Up to now the army has been trying to get set, I suppose. Nora said, "Is there any way we can hail them? Let them know -- " Her words were cut off by the horror of what happened. As they watched, the plane skimmed low across the Loop. At a point, approximately over Lake Street, Frank estimated, the planes were annihilated. There was a flash of blue fire coming in like jagged lightning to form four balls of fire around the planes. The fire balls turned, almost instantly, into globes of white smoke that drifted lazily away. And that was all. But the planes vanished completely. "What happened?" Wilson muttered. "Where'd they go?" "It was as if they hit a wall,"' Nora said, her voice hushed with awe. "I think that was what happened," Frank said. "The invaders have some kind of a weapon that holds us helpless. Otherwise the army wouldn't have established this no-man's-land and pulled out. The reports said we have them surrounded on all sides with the help of the lake. We're trying to keep them isolated." Jim Wilson snorted. "It looks like we've got them right where they want us." "Anyhow, we're damn fools to stick around here. We'd better head south." Wilson looked wistfully about the room. "I guess so, but it's a shame -- walking away from all this." Nora was staring out the window, a small frown on her face. "I wonder who they are and where they came from?" "The teletype releases were pretty vague on that." She turned quickly. "There's something peculiar about them. Something really strange." "What do you mean?" "Last night when we were walking up the street. It must have been these invaders we heard. They must have been across the street. But they didn't act like invaders. They seemed -- well, scared. I got the feeling they ran from us in panic. And they haven't been back." Wilson said, "They may not have been there at all. Probably our imaginations." "I don't think so," Frank cut in. "They were there and then they were gone. I'm sure of it." "Those wailing noises. They were certainly signalling to each other. Do you suppose that's the only language they have?" Nora walked over and offered the silent Minna a cigarette. Minna refused with a shake of her head. "I wish we knew what they looked like," Frank said. "But let's not sit here talking. Let's get going" Jim Wilson was scowling. There was a marked sullenness in his manner. "Not Minna and me. I've changed my mind. I'm sticking here." Frank blinked in surprise. "Are you crazy? We've run our luck out already. Did you see what happened to those planes?" "The hell with the planes. We've got it good here. This I like. I like it a lot. We'll stay." "Okay," Frank replied hotly, "but talk for yourself. You're not making Minna stay!" Wilson's eyes narrowed. "I'm not? Look, buster -- how about minding your own goddam business?" The vague feelings of disgust Frank had had now crystallized into words. "I won't let you get away with it! You think I'm blind? Hauling her into the back room every ten minutes! Don't you think I know why? You're nothing but a damn sex maniac! You've got her terrorized until she's afraid to open her mouth. She goes with us!" Jim Wilson was on his feet. His face blazed with rage. The urge to kill was written in the crouch of his body and the twist of his mouth. "You goddam nosey little squirt. I'll -- " Wilson charged across the short, intervening distance. His arms went out in a clutching motion. But Frank Brooks wasn't full of knockout drops this time, and with a clear head he was no pushover. Blinded with rage, Jim Wilson was a pushover. Frank stepped in between his outstretched arms and slugged him squarely on top of the head with the telephone. Wilson went down like a felled steer. The scream came from Minna as she sprang across the room. She had turned from a colorless rag doll into a tigress. Shehit Frank square in the belly with small fists at the end of stiff, outstretched arms. The full force of her charge was behind the fists, and Frank went backward over the bed. Minna did not follow up her attack. She dropped to the floor beside Jim Wilson and took his huge head in her lap. "You killed him," she sobbed. "You -- you murderer! You killed him! You had no right!" Frank sat wide-eyed. "Minna! For God's sake! I was helping you. I did it for you!" "Why don't you mind your business? I didn't ask you to protect me? I don't need any protection -- not from Jim." "You mean you didn't mind the way he's treated you -- " "You've killed him -- killed him -- " Minna raised her head slowly. She looked at Frank as though she saw him for the first time. "You're a fool," she said dully. "A big fool. What right have you got to meddle with other people's affairs? Are you God or something, to run people's lives?" "Minna -- I -- " It was as though he hadn't spoken. "Do you know what it's like to have nobody? All your life to go on and grow older without anybody? I didn't have no one and then Jim came along and wanted me." Frank walked close to her and bent down. She reacted like a tiger. "Leave him alone! Leave him alone! You've done enough!" Nonplused, Frank backed away. "People with big noses -- always sticking them in. That's you. Was that any of your business what he wanted of me? Did I complain?" "I'm sorrv, Minna. I didn't know." "I'd rather go into back rooms with him than stay in front rooms without nobody." She began to cry now. Wordlessly -- soundlessly, rocking back and forth with the huge man's bloody head in her lap. "Anytime," she crooned. "Anytime I would -- " The body in her arms stirred. She looked down through her tears and saw the small black eyes open. They were slightly crossed, unfocused as they were by the force of the blow. They straightened and Jim mumbled, "What the hell -- what the hell -- " Minna's time for talking seemed over. She smiled -- a smile hardly perceptible, as though it was for herself alone. "You're all right," she said. "That's good. You're all right." Jim pushed her roughly away and staggered to his feet. He stood swaying for a moment, his head turning; for all the world like a bull blinded and tormented. Then his eyes focused on Frank. "You hit me with the goddam phone." "Yeah -- I hit you." "I'm gonna kill you." "Look -- I made a mistake." Frank picked up the phone and backed against the wall. "I hit you, but you were coming at me. I made a mistake and I'm sorry." "I'll smash your goddam skull." "Maybe you will," Frank said grimly. "But you'll work for it. It won't come easy." A new voice bit across the room. That's what I like best. Everybody quiet down." They turned and saw a slim, pale-skinned young man in the open doorway. The door had opened quietly and no one had heard it. Now the pale young man was standing in the room with a small, nickle-plated revolver in his right hand. The left hand was close down at his side. It was swathed generously in white bandage. The young man chuckled. "The last four people in the world were in a room," he said, "and there was a knock on the door." His chuckle deepened to one of pure merriment. "Only there wasn't a knock. A man just walked in with a gun that made him boss." No one moved. No one spoke. The man waited, then went on: "My name is Leroy Davis. I lived out west and I always had a keeper because they said I wasn't quite right. They wanted me to pull out with the rest of them, but I slugged my keeper and here I am." "Put down the gun and we'll talk it over," Frank said. "We're all in this together." "No, we aren't. I've got a gun, so that makes me top man. You're all in it together, but I'm not. I'm the boss, and which one of you tried to cut my hand off last night." "You tried to break in here yelling and screaming like a madman. I held the door. What else could I do?" "It's all right. I'm not mad. My type -- we may be nuts, but we never hold a grudge. I can't remember much about last night. I found some whisky in a place down the street and whisky drives me nuts. I don't know what I'm doing when I drink whisky. They say once about five years ago I got drunk and killed a little kid. but T don't remember." Nobody spoke. "I got out of it. They got me out some way. High priced lawyers got me out. Cost my dad a pile." Hysteria had been piling up inside of Nora. She had held it back, but now a little of it spurted out from between her set teeth. "Do something, somebody. Isn't anybody going to do anything ?" Leroy Davis blinked at her. "There's nothing they can do, honey," he said in a kindly voice. "I've got the gunThey'd be crazy to try anything." Nora's laugh was like the rattle of dry peas. She sat down on the bed and looked up at the ceiling and laughed. "It's crazy. It's all so crazy! We're sitting here in a doomed city with some kind of alien invaders all around us and w r e don't know' what they look like. They haven't hurt us at all. We don't even know what they look like. We don't worry a bit about them because we're too busy try ing to kill each other," Frank Brooks took Nora by the arm. "Stop it! Quit laughing like that!" Nora shook him off. "Maybe we need someone to take us over. It's all pretty crazy!" "Stop it." Nora's eyes dulled down as she looked at Frank. She dropped her head and seemed a little ashamed of herself. "I'm sorry. I'll be quiet." Jim Wilson had been standing by the wall looking first at the newcomer, then back at Frank Brooks. Wilson seemed confused as to who his true enemy really was. Finally he took a step toward Leroy Davis. Frank Brooks stopped him with a motion, but kept his eyes on Davis. "Have you seen anybody else?" Davis regarded Frank with long, careful consideration. His eyes were bright and birdlike. They reminded Frank of a squirrel's eyes. Davis said, "I bumped into an old man out on Halstead Street. He wanted to know where everybody had gone. He asked me, but I didn't know." "What happened to the old man?" Nora asked. She asked the question as though dreading to do it; but as though some compulsion forced her to speak. "I shot him," Davis said cheerfully. "It was a favor, really. Here was this old man staggering down the street with nothing but a lot of wasted years to show for his efforts. He was no good alive, and he didn't have the courage to die." Davis stopped and cocked his head brightly. "You know -- I think that's what's been wrong with the world. Too many people without the guts them." It had now dawned upon Jim Wilson that they were faced by a maniac. His eyes met those of Frank Brooks and they were -- on this point at least -- in complete agreement. A working procedure sprang up, unworded, between them. Jim Wilson took a slow, casual step toward the homicidal maniac. "You didn't see anyone else?" Frank asked. Davis ignored the question. "Look at it this way," he said. "In the old days they had Texas long horns. Thin stringy cattle that gave up meat as tough as leather. Do we have cattle like that today? No. Because we bred out the weak line." Frank said, "There are some cigarettes on that table if you want one." Jim Wilson took another slow step toward Davis. Davis said, "We bred with intelligence, with a thought to what a steer was for and we produced a walking chunk of meat as wide as it is long. "Uh-huh," Frank said. "Get the point? See what I'm driving at? Humans are more important than cattle, but can we make them breed intelligently? Oh, no! That interferes with damn silly human liberties. You can't tell a man he can only have two kids. It's his God-given right to have twelve when the damn moron can't support three. Get what I mean?" "Sure -- sure, I get it." "You better think it over, mister -- and tell that fat bastard to quit sneaking up on me or I'll blow his brains all over the carpet!" If the situation hadn't been so grim it would have appeared ludicrous. Jim Wilson, feeling success almost in his grasp, was balanced on tiptoe for a lunge. He teetered, almost lost his balance and fell back against the wall. "Take it easy," Frank said. "I'll take it easy," Davis replied. "I'll kill every goddam one of you -- " he pointed the gun at Jim Wilson. " -- starting with him." "Now wait a minute," Frank said. "You're unreasonable. What right have you got to do that? What about the law of survival? You're standing there with a gun on us. You're going to kill us. Isn't it natural to try anything we can to save our own lives?" A look of admiration brightened Davis' eyes. "Say! I like you. You're all right. You're logical. A man can talk to you. If there's anything I like it's talking to a logical man." "Thanks." "Too bad I'm going to have to kill you. We could sit down and have some nice long talks together." "Why do you want to kill us?" Minna asked. She had not spoken before. In fact, she had spoken so seldom during the entire time they'd been together that her voice was a novelty to Frank. He was inclined to discount her tirade on the floor with Wilson's head in her lap. She had been a different person then. Now she had lapsed back into her old shell. Davis regarded thoughtfully. "Must you have a reason?" "You should have a reason to kill people." Davis said, "All right, if it will make you any happier. I told you tried to make me leave town. He got in the car, behind the wheel. I got into the back seat and split his skull with a tire iron." "What's that got to do with us?" "Just this. Tommy was a better person than anyone of you or all of you put together. If he had to die, what right have you got to live? Is that enough of a reason for you?" "This is all too damn crazy," Jim Wilson roared. He was on the point of leaping at Davis and his gun. At that moment, from the north, came a sudden crescendo of the weird invader wailings. It was louder than it had previously been but did not seem nearer. The group froze, all ears trained upon the sound. "They're talking again," Nora whispered. "Uh-huh," Frank replied. "But it's different this time. As if -- " " -- as if they were getting ready for something," Nora said. "Do you suppose they're going to move south?" Davis said, "I'm not going to kill you here. We're going down stairs." The pivotal moment, hinged in Jim Wilson's mind, that could have changed the situation, had come and gone. The fine edge of additional madness that would make a man hurl himself at a loaded gun, was dulled. Leroy Davis motioned pre-emptorily toward Minna. "You first -- then the other babe. You walk side by side down the hall with the men behind you. Straight down to the lobby." They complied without resistance. There was only Jim Wilson's scowl, Frank Brooks' clouded eyes, and the white, taut look of Nora. Nora's mind was not on the gun. It was filled with thoughts of the pale maniac who held it. He was in command. Instinctively, she felt that maniacs in command have one of but two motivations -- sex and murder. Her reaction to possible murder was secondary. But what if this man insisted upon laying his hands upon her. What if he forced her into the age old thing she had done so often? Nora shuddered. But it was also in her mind to question, and be surprised at the reason for her revulsion. She'visualized the hands upon her body -- the old familiar things, and the taste in her mouth was one of horror. She had never experienced such shrinkings before. Why now. Had she herself changed? Had something happened during the night that made the past a time of shame? Or was it the madman himself? She did not know. Nora returned from her musings to find herself standing in the empty lobby. Leroy Davis, speaking to Frank, was saying. "You look kind of tricky to me. Put your hands on your head. Lock your fingers together over your head and keep your hands there." Jim Wilson was standing close to the mute Minna. She had followed all the orders without any show of anger, with no outward expression. Always she had kept her eyes on Jim Wilson. Obviously, whatever Jim ordered, she would have done without question. Wilson leaned his head down toward her. He said, "Listen, baby, there's something I keep meaning to ask but I always forget it. W T hat's your last name?" "Trumble -- Minna Trumble. I thought I told you." "Maybe you did. Maybe I didn't get it." Nora felt the hysteria welling again. "How long are you going to keep doing this?" she asked. Leroy Davis cocked his head as he looked at her. "Doing what?" "Play cat and mouse like this. Holding us on a pin like flies in an exhibit." Leroy Davis smiled brightly. "Like a butterfly in your case, honey. A big, beautiful butterfly." "What are you going to do," Frank Brooks snapped. "Whatever it is, let's get it over with?" "Can't you see what I'm doing?" Davis asked with genuine wonder. "Are you that stupid? I'm being the boss. I'm in command and I like it. I hold life and death over four people and I'm savoring the thrill of it. You're pretty stupid, mister, and if you use that 'can't get away with it' line. I'll put a bullet into your left ear and watch it come out your right one." Jim Wilson's fists were doubled. He was again approaching the reckless point. And again it was dulled by the gradually increasing sound of a motor -- not in the air, but from the street level to the south. It was a sane, cheerful sound and was resented instantly by the insane mind of Leroy Davis. He tightened even to the point that his face grew more pale from the tension. He backed to a window, looked out quickly, and turned back. "It's a jeep," he said. "They're going by the hotel. If anybody makes a move, or yells, they'll find four bodies in here and me gone. That's what I'm telling you and you know I'll do it." They knew he would do it and they stood silent, trying to dredge up the nerve to make a move. The jeep's motor backfired a couple of times as it approached Madison Street. Each time, Leroy Davis' nerves reacted sharply and the four people kept their eyes trained on the gun in his hand. The jeep came to the intersection and slowed down. There was a conference between its two occupants -- helmeted soldiers in dark brown battle dress. Then the jeep moved on up Clark Street toward Lake. A choked sigh escaped from Nora's throat. Frank Brooks turned toward her. "Take it easy," he said. "We're not dead yet. I don't think he wants to kill us." The reply came from Minna. She spoke quietly. "I don't care. T can't stand any more of this. After all, we aren't animals. We're human beings and we have a right to live and die as we please." Minna walked toward Leroy Davis. "I'm not afraid of your gun any more. All you can do with it is kill me. Go ahead and do it." Minna walked up to Leroy Davis. He gaped at her and said, "You're crazy! Get back there. You're a crazy dame!" He fired the gun twice and Minna died appreciating the incongruity of his words. She went out on a note of laughter and as she fell, Jim Wilson, with an echoing animal roar, lunged at Leroy Davis. His great hand closed completely over that of Davis, hiding the gun. There was a muffled explosion and the bullet cut unnoticed through Wilson's palm. Wilson jerked the gun from Davis' weak grasp and hurled it away. Then he killed Davis. He did it slowly, a surprising thing for Wilson. He lifted Davis by his neck and held him with his feet off the floor. He squeezed Davis' neck, seeming to do it with great leisure as Davis made horrible noises and kicked his legs. Nora turned her eyes away, buried them in Frank Brooks' shoulder, but she could not keep the sounds from reaching her ears. Frank held her close. "Take it easy," he said. "Take it easy." And he was probably not conscious of saying it. "Tell him to hurry," Nora whispered. "Tell him to get it over with. "That's what he is -- an animal." Frank Brooks stared in fascination at Letov Davis' distorted, darkening face. It was beyond semblance of anything human now. The eyes bulged and the tongue came from his mouth as though frantically seeking relief. The animal sounds quieted and died away. Nora heard the sound of the body falling to the floor -- a limp, soft sound of finality. She turned and saw Jim Wilson with his hands still extended and cupped. The terrible hands from which the stench of a terrible life was drifting away into empty air. Wilson looked down at his handiwork. "He's dead," Wilson said slowly. He turned to face Frank and Nora. There was a great disappointment in his face. "That's all there is to it," he said, dully. "He's just -- dead." Without knowing it for what it was, Jim Wilson was full of the futile aftertaste of revenge. He bent down to pick up Minna's body. There was a small blue hole in the right cheek and another one over the left eye. With a glance at Frank and Nora, Jim Wilson covered the wounds with his hand as though they were not decent. He picked her up in his arms and walked across the lobby and up the stairs with the slow, quiet tread of a weary man. The sound of the jeep welled up again, but it was further away now. Frank Brooks took Nora's hand and they hurried out into the street. As they crossed the sidewalk, the sound of the jeep was drowned by a sudden swelling of the wailings to the northward. On still a new note, they rose and fell on the still air. A note of panic, of new knowledge, it seemed, but Frank and Nora were not paying close attention. The sounds of the jeep motor had come from the west and they got within sight of the Madison-Well intersection in time to see the jeep hurtle southward at its maximum speed. Frank yelled and waved his arms, but he knew he had been neither seen nor heard. They were given little time for disappointment however, because a new center of interest appeared to the northward. From around the corner of Washington Street, into Clark, moved three strange figures. There was a mixture of belligerence and distress in their actions. They carried odd looking weapons and seemed interested in using them upon something or someone, but they apparently lacked the energy to raise them although they appeared to be rather light. The creatures themselves were humanoid, Frank thought. He tightened his grip on Nora's hand. "They've seen us." "Let's not run," Nora said. "I'm tired of running. All it's gotten us is trouble. Let's just stand here." "Don't be foolish." "I'm not running. You can if you want to." Frank turned his attention back to the three strange creatures. He allowed natural curiosity full reign. Thoughts of flight vanished from his mind. "They're so thin -- so fragile," Nora said. "But their weapons aren't." "It's hard to believe, even seeing them, that they're from another planet." "How so? They certainly don't look much like us." "I mean with the talk, for so long, about flying saucers and space flight and things like that. Here they are, but it doesn't seem possible." "There's something wrong with them." This was true. Two of the strange beings had fallen to the sidewalk. The third came doggedly on, dragging one foot after the other until he went to his hands and knees. He remained motionless for a long time, his head hanging limply. Then he too, sank to the cement and lay still. The wailings from the north now took on a tone of intense agony -- great desperation. After that came a yawning silence. the military man said. "Or rather, natural forces defeated them. We certainly had little to do with it." Nora, Frank, and Jim Wilson stood at the curb beside a motorcycle. The man on the cycle supported it with a leg propped against the curb as he talked. "We saw three of them die up the street," Frank said. "Our scouting party saw the same thing happen. That's why we moved in. It's about over now. We'll know a lot more about them and where they came from in twenty-four hours." They had nothing further to say. The military man regarded them thoughtfully. "I don't know about you three. If you ignored the evacation through no fault of your own and can prove it -- " "There were four of us," Jim Wilson said. "Then we met another man. He's inside on the floor. I killed him." "Murder?" the military man said sharply. "He killed a woman who was with us," Frank said. "He was a maniac. When he's identified I'm pretty sure he'll have a past record." "Where is the woman's body?" "On a bed upstairs," Wilson said. "I'll have to hold all of you. Martial law exists in this area. You're in the hands of the army." people now, going about their business, pushing and jostling, eating in the restaurants, making electricity for the lights, generating power for the telephones. Nora, Frank, and Jim Wilson sat in a restaurant on Clark Street. "We're all different people now," Nora said. "No one could go through what we've been through and be the same." Jim Wilson took her statement listlessly. "Did they find out what it was about our atmosphere that killed them?" "They're still working on that, I think." Frank Brooks stirred his coffee, raised a spoonful and let it drip back into the cup. "I'm going up to the Chicago Avenue police station," Wilson said. Frank and Nora looked up in surprise. Frank asked, "Why? The military court missed it -- the fact you escaped from jail." "They didn't miss it I don't think. I don't think they cared much. I'm going back anyway." "It won't be much of a rap." "No, a pretty small one. I want to get it over with." He got up from his chair. "So long. Maybe I'll see you around." "So long." "Goodbye." Frank said, "I think I'll beat it too. I've got a job in a factory up north. Maybe they're operating again." He got to his feet and stood awkwardly by the table. "Besides -- I've got some pay coming." Nora didn't say anything. Frank said, "Well -- so long. Maybe I'll see you around." "Maybe. Goodbye." Frank Brooks walked north on Clark Street. He was glad to get away from the restaurant. Nora was a good kid but hell -- you didn't take up with a hooker. A guy played around, but you didn't stick with them. But it made a guy think. He was past the kid stage. It was time for him to find a girl and settle down. A guy didn't want to knock around all his life. Nora walked west on Madison Street. Then she remembered the Halstead Street slums were in that direction and turned south on Wells. She had nine dollars in her bag and that worried her. You couldn't get along on nine dollars in Chicago very long. There was a tavern on Jackson near Wells. Nora went inside. The barkeep didn't frown at her. That was good. She went to the bar and ordered a beer and was served. After a while a man came in. A middle aged man who might have just come into Chicago -- whose bags might still be at the LaSalle Street Station down the block. The man looked at Nora, then away. After a while looked at her again. Nora smiled. If earthlings are looking for an " incident " the gods of chance will furnish one. On Lobe, however, it might be merely a neglible -- Margin of Error By Richard Deeming Illustrated by Bob Martin small Negro boy in Porto Rico was hunting rats with an ancient .# caliber single-shot rifle. At one minute after twelve noon he looked up as the jet mail express from Communist Haiti zoomed by a quarter mile offshore and ten thousand feet high, en route to Communist Trinidad. As sometimes happens in imaginative childhood, the boy visualized the far-off jet express as a bird and raised his rifle to his shoulder. He said "bang!" and somehow the tiny rifle went off. To his horror the jet express immediately performed a loop and plunged into the sea. Within twenty-four hours, the small boy had been magnified into an anti-aircraft crew, and an incident had been manufactured. This, because an incident was desired by one Marshall Igor Matoshek -- Dictator of Russia -- and a great many other nations. Oa January #nd, #, Matoshek addressed, hy telepeople under his rule, plus the twohis rule, he simply announced that the warmongering bourgeois dictatorship which ruled the Tri-federation of North America and the Island of Porto Rico had vilely attacked the free and peace-loving democracies of the Communist International, and that a state of war existed. At the same time, an extremely unimportant conference was taking place on the planet Lobe, eight light years away from the planet Earth. Since the participants in this conference conversed by thought transference in a language not translatable into any language ever employed on Earth, and even impossible to indicate phonetically, only its substance can be given. For the same reason there is no way to express the true names of the participants, so for purposes of convenience they are arbitrarily designated Horace, George and Junior. In the extremely advanced civilization of Lobe, Horace was the Earthly equivalent of a kindergarten teacher. He was a tall, distinguished looking Lobian with nearly white antennae, but a beak unchipped by age and a firm, unwrinkled underside where it was unprotected by his shell. The position of George in Lobian economy has no counterpart on Earth, and therefore cannot be accurately described. Approximately, he was something like a skilled artisan, though his work was entirely mental, consisting of polishing the raw thoughts of workers higher in the Lobian professional scale. Biologically it is easier to put a finger on George, however. He was the father of Junior. Junior was the subject of the conference. "It is difficult and embarrassing to tell a parent his child is subnormal," Horace was transmitting, glancing first at Junior to make sure his receiving antenna was retracted as ordered. "I hope you understand the delicacy of my position." "Of course, professor," George radioed back glumly. "It's just that I had such hopes for the lad." His thought trailed off and he waved several tentacles vaguely. "Being a drone will at least be a pleasant life," Horace reassured him. "Junior will be happy. You have the consolation of the Act being in force anyway. Ten years ago he would have been destroyed." George absorbed this with small solace. Examining his son, he felt a twinge of compassion because the lad so resembled his dead mother. The same delicate sight-tubes, shining black beak and gentle curve to the brittle plate encasing his shoulders. He signalled the youngster to thrust out his receiving antenna. "Your teacher tells me you have a little trouble with your work, son," he transmitted gently. "Is there anything particular bothering you?" In the high frequency of the very young, Junior sent back, "It's my margin of . error, Father. I understand the principles of the problems, but my answers come out wrong. I seem to make mechanical mistakes." George glanced at Horace inquiringly, and the teacher motioned Junior to retract his antenna again. "An indication of an intermittent In oak in the thought pattern," he i laincd. "With our present knowledge, nothing can be done for him. He can absorb knowledge, of course. Under our modern teaching methods we can impart knowledge to an imbecile." His expression indicated he believed that the situation in this case. "But he could never be allowed to perform even the simplest problem except under supervision. Conceive what might happen if we even trained him to become merely a thought-link computer. He might insert an error whose end result could throw the entire universe out of balance." "Would you mind my watching while he worked some simple problem?" George radioed. "Of course not." Again the teacher signalled his student, and Junior's antenna obediently shot out. "Your father would like to see you at work, Junior. Take him into your room and explain the problem you were doing when we interrupted you." Then he paused and added a caution. "No practical application until I have checked your calculations, however." munist subjects watched the televised image of Marshall Igor Matoshek with stoic resignation and cheered with mechanical enthusiin the three republics of North America and on the Island of Porto Rico watched the same image with fear in their hearts. "We stand on the threshold of the greatest era in history," intoned the most important man in the world. "The outcome of the vast struggle in which we are about to engage will determine the destiny of this planet for all time. No single instance in the known past has ever been of such import." The President of the Tri-federation of North America did not wait for the talk to end. He lifted his telephone and ordered the H-bomb shields aloft at once. "The first problem is simple enough," Junior explained to his father. He indicated a small scanning screen, and twisted dials until a section of the heavens was visible. "One at a time I take each of the twenty-two solar systems outside of our own and compute what effect its mass and location has on the location of this planet. In other thoughts, if the particular solar system were not in existence, and consequently not exerting its gravitational pull on Lobe, what would Lobe's orbit around our sun be?" "I see," Gorge transmitted. "On that part I made no mistakes," Junior sent proudly. "Teacher checked all my answers himself." "Then his expression became glum. "The second part was to take each individual planet of each solar system and compute what effect its mass and location has, first, on its own solar system and, second, on our planet. I used the proper formulae and have all my answers, but teacher has not yet checked them." Examining the youngster's glum expression, George retracted his sending antenna and thought to himself, "The lad doesn't seem to have much faith in the answers he got." "At this moment the great guided missile emplacements at Paris, London, Honolulu and Rio de Janeiro are preparing to launch destruction at every principal city in North America and Porto Rico," Marshall Matoshek informed his audience. "The fire-control officers of these batteries are watching and listening to me just as you others are. The signal to fire will come from me right there on your screen." He paused to let this sink in. "The Communist International is averse to destruction where peaceful methods are possible, however. My aide-de-camp, General Serge Marik, is awaiting transoceanic connection with the President of the Tri-federation of North America at this very moment. If the three republics of North America and the Island of Porto Rico agree to surrender immediately and unconditionally, the order to fire will not be issued." The phone of the President of the Tri-federation of North America buzzed softly. He picked it up, listened for a moment and smiled bleakly at the serious-faced men gathered about his desk. One by one they shook their heads and smiled bleakly back at him. "Tell the old windbag to go to Hell," the President said. "The answers seem to be substantially correct," Horace conceded grudgingly. He glanced at George almost in apology. "The first time since school started his margin of error has been negligible. The exception which proves the rule." He bent his gray sight-tubes at the youngster. "Now compute for me the provable planet whose (Continued on page #) Under the new system of the Managerials, the fight was not for life but for death ! And great was the ingenuity of -- The Victor By Bryce Walton Illustrated by Kelly Freas fraction of a minute in which to die. He dropped through the tubular beams of alloydem steel and hung there, five thousand feet above the tiers and walkways below. At either end of the walkway crossing between the two power-hung buildings, he saw the plainclothes security officers running in toward him. He grinned and started to release his grip. He would think about them on the way down. His fingers wouldn't work. He kicked and strained and tore at himself with his own weight, but his hands weren't his own any more. He might have anticipated that. Some paralysis beam freezing his hands into the metal. He sagged to limpness. His chin dropped. For an instant, then, the fire in his heart almost went out, but not quite. It survived that one terrible moment of defeat, then burned higher. And perhaps something in that desperate resistance was the factor that kept it burning where it was thought no flame could burn. He felt the rigidity of paralysis leaving his arms as he was lifted, helped along the walkway to a security car. The car looked like any other car. The officers appeared like all the other people in the clockwork culture of the mechanized New System. Marquis sought the protection of personal darkness behind closed eyelids as the monorail car moved faster and faster through the high clean air. Well -- he'd worked with the Underground against the System for a long time. He had known that eventually he would be caught. There were rumors of what happened to men then, and even the vaguest, unsubstantiated rumors were enough to indicate that death was preferable. That was the Underground's philosophy -- better to die standing up as a man with some degree of personal integrity and freedom than to go on living as a conditioned slave of the state. He'd missed -- but he wasn't through yet though. In a hollow tooth was a capsule containing a very high-potency poison. A little of that would do the trick too. But he would have to wait for the right time... T he manager was thin, his face angular, and he matched up with the harsh steel angles of the desk and the big room somewhere in the Security Building. His face had a kind of emotion -- cold, detached, cynically superior. "We don't get many of your kind," he said. "Political prisoners are becoming more scarce all the time. As your number indicates. From now on, you'll be No. #." He looked at some papers, then up at Marquis. "You evidently found out a great deal. However, none of it will do you or what remains of your Underground fools any good." The Manager studied Marquis with detached curiosity. "You learned things concerning the Managerial that have so far remained secret." It was partly a question. Marquis' lean and darkly inscrutable face smiled slightly. "You're good at understatement. Yes -- I found out what we've suspected for some time. That the Managerial class has found some way to stay young. Either a remarkable longevity, or immortality. Of all the social evils that's the worst of all. To deny the people knowledge of such a secret." The Manager nodded. "Then you did find that out? The Underground knows? Well, it will do no good." "It will, eventually. They'll go on and someday they'll learn the secret." Marquis thought of Marden. Marden was as old as the New System of statism and inhumanity that had started off disguised as social-democracy. Three-hundred and three years old to be exact. The Manager said. "No. # -- you will be sent to the work colony on the Moon. You won't be back. We've tried re-conditioning rebels, but it doesn't work. A rebel has certain basic deviant characteristics and we can't overcome them sufficiently to make happy, well-adjusted workers out of you. However on the Moon -- you will conform. It's a kind of social experiment there in associative reflex culture, you might say. You'll conform all right." He was taken to a small, naked, gray-steel room. He thought about taking the capsule from his tooth now, but decided he might be observed. They would rush in an antidote and make him live. And he might not get a chance to take his life in any other way. He would try of course, but his knowledge of his future situation was vague -- except that in it he would conform. There would be extreme conditioned-reflex therapeutic techniques. And it would be pretty horrible. That was all he knew. He didn't see the pellet fall. He heard the slight sound it made and then saw the almost colorless gas hissing softly, clouding the room. He tasted nothing, smelled or felt nothing. He passed out quickly and painlessly. fice, and he knew he was on the Moon. The far wall was spherical and was made up of the outer shell of the pressure dome which kept out the frigid cold nights and furnace-hot days. It was opaque and Marquis could see the harsh black and white shadows out there -- the metallic edges of the far crater wall. This Manager was somewhat fat, with a round pink face and cold blue eyes. He sat behind a chrome shelf of odd shape suspended from the ceiling with silver wires. The Manager said. "No. #, here there is only work. At first, of course, you will rebel. Later you will work, and finally there will be nothing else. Things here are rigidly scheduled, and you will learn the routines as the conditioning bells acquaint you with them. We are completely self-sufficient here. We are developing the perfect scientifically-controlled society. It is a kind of experiment. A closed system to test to what extremes we can carry our mastery of associative reflex to bring man security and happiness and freedom from responsibility." Marquis didn't say anything. There was nothing to say. He knew he couldn't get away with trying to kill this particular Managerial specimen. But one man, alone, a rebel, with something left in him that still burned, could beat the system. He had to! "Our work here is specialized. During the indoctrination period you will do a very simple routine job in coordination with the cybernetics machines. There, the machines and the nervous system of the workers become slowly cooperative. Machine and man learn to work very intimately together. Later, after the indoctrination -- because of your specialized knowledge of food-concentrate preparation -- we will transfer you to the food-mart. The period of indoctrination varies in length with the individuals. You will be screened now and taken to the indoctrination ward. We probably won't be seeing one another again. The bells take care of everything here. The bells and the machines. There is never an error -- never any mistakes. Machines do not make mistakes." He was marched out of there and through a series of rooms. He was taken in by generators, huge oscilloscopes. Spun like a living tube through curtains of vacuum tube voltimeters, electronic power panels. Twisted and squeezed through rolls of skeins of hook-up wire. Bent through shieldings of every color, size and shape. Rolled over panel plates, huge racks of glowing tubes, elaborate transceivers. Tumbled down long surfaces of gleaming bakelite. Plunged through color-indexed files of resistors and capacitances... here machine and man learn to work very intimately together. As he drifted through the machine tooled nightmare, Marquis knew what he had been fighting all his life, what he would continue to fight with every grain of ingenuity. Mechanization -- the horror of losing one's identity and becoming part of an assembly line. He could hear a clicking sound as tubes sharpened and faded in intensity. The clicking -- rhythm, a hypnotic rhythm like the beating of his own heart -- the throbbing and thrumming, the contracting and expanding, the pulsing and pounding... the machines and the nervous system of the workers become slowly cooperative. Beds were spaced ten feet apart down both sides of a long gray metal hall. There were no cells, no privacy, nothing but beds and the gray metalene suits with numbers printed across the chest. His bed, with his number printed above it, was indicated to him, and the guard disappeared. He was alone. It was absolutely silent. On his right a woman lay on a bed. No. #. She had been here a long time. She appeared dead. Her breasts rose and fell with a peculiarly steady rhythm, and seemed to be coordinated with the silent, invisible throbbing of the metal walls. She might have been attractive once. Here it didn't make any difference. Her face was gray, like metal. Her hair was cropped short. Her uniform was the same as the man's on Marquis' left. The man was No. #. He hadn't been here so long. His face was thin and gray. His hair was dark, and he was about the same size and build as Marquis. His mouth hung slightly open and his eyes were closed and there was a slight quivering at the ends of the fingers which were laced across his stomach. "Hello," Marquis said. The man shivered, then opened dull eyes and looked up at Marquis. "I just got in. Name's Charles Marquis." The man blinked. "I'm -- I'm -- No. #." He looked down at his chest, repeated the number. His fingers shook a little as he touched his lips. Marquis said. "What's this indoctrination?" "You -- learn. The bells ring -- you forget -- and learn -- " "There's absolutely no chance of escaping?" Marquis whispered, more to himself than to #. "Only by dying," #I shivered. His eyes rolled crazily, then he turned over and buried his face in his arms. The situation had twisted all the old accepted values squarely around. Preferring death over life. But not because of any anti-life attitude, or pessimism, or defeatism. None of those negative attitudes that would have made the will-todie abnormal under conditions in which there would have been hope and some faint chance of a bearable future. Here to keep on living was a final form of de-humanized indignity, of humiliation, of ignominy, of the worst thing of all -- loss of one'sself -- of one's individuality. To die as a human being was much more preferable over continuing to live as something else -- something neither human or machine, but something of both, with none of the dignity of either. detected the capsule of poison in Marquis' tooth. The capsule contained ten grains of poison, only one of which was enough to bring a painless death within sixteen hours or so. That was his ace in the hole, and he waited only for the best time to use it. Bells rang. The prisoners jumped from their beds and went through a few minutes of calisthenics. Other bells rang and a tray of small tins of food-concentrates appeared out of a slit in the wall by each bed. More bells rang, different kinds of bells, some deep and brazen, others high and shrill. And the prisoners marched off to specialized jobs cooperating with various machines. You slept eight hours. Calisthenics five minutes. Eating ten minutes. Relaxation to the tune of musical bells, ten minutes. Work period eight hours. Repeat. That was all of life, and after a while Marquis knew, a man would not be aware of time, nor of his name, nor that he had once been human. Marquis felt deep lancing pain as he tried to resist the bells. Each time the bells rang and a prisoner didn't respond properly, invisible rays of needle pain punched and kept punching until he reacted properly. And finally he did as the bells told him to do. Finally he forgot that things had ever been any other way. Marquis sat on his bed, eating, while the bells of eating rang across the bowed heads in the gray uniforms. He stared at the girl, then at the man, #. There were many opportunities to take one's own life here. That had perplexed him from the start -- why hasn't the girl, and this man, succeeded in dying? And all the others? They were comparatively new here, all these in this indoctrination ward. Why weren't they trying to leave in the only dignified way of escape left? No. #I tried to talk, he tried hard to remember things. Sometimes memory would break through and bring him pictures of other times, of happenings on Earth, of a girl he had known, of times when he was a child. But only the mildest and softest kind of recollections... Marquis said. "I don't think there's a prisoner here who doesn't want to escape, and death is the only way out for us. We know that." For an instant, No. #I stopped eating. A spoonful of food concentrate hung suspended between his mouth and the shelf. Then the food moved again to the urging of the bells. Invisible pain needles gouged Marquis' neck, and he ate again too, automatically, talking between tasteless bites. "A man's life at least is his own," Marquis said. "They can take everything else. But a man certainly has a right and a duty to take that life if by so doing he can retain his integrity as a human being. Suicide -- " No. #I bent forward. He groaned, mumbled "Don't -- don't -- " several times, then curled forward and lay on the floor knotted up into a twitching ball. The eating period was over. The lights went off. Bells sounded for relaxation. Then the sleep bells bedarkness. Marquis lay there in the dark and he was afraid. He had the poison. He had the will. But he couldn't be unique in that respect. What was the matter with the others? All right, the devil with them. Maybe they'd been broken too soon to act. He could act. Tomorrow, during the work period, he would take a grain of the poison. Put the capsule back in the tooth. The poison would work slowly, painlessly, paralyzing the nervous system,finally the heart. Sometime during the beginning of the next sleep period he would be dead. That would leave six or seven hours of darkness and isolation for him to remain dead, so they couldn't get to him in time to bring him back. He mentioned suicide to the girl during the next work period. She moaned a little and curled up like a foetus on the floor. After an hour, she got up and began inserting punch cards into the big machine again. She avoided Marquis. Marquis looked around, went into a corner with his back to the room, slipped the capsule out and let one of the tiny, almost invisible grains, melt on his tongue. He replaced the capsule and returned to the machine. A quiet but exciting triumph made the remainder of the work period more bearable. Back on his bed, he drifted into sleep, into what he knew was the final sleep. He was more fortunate than the others. Within an hour he would be dead. screaming. The sounds rose higher and higher. A human body, somewhere... pain unimaginable twisting up through clouds of belching steam... muscles quivering,nerves twitching... and somewhere a body floating and bobbing and crying... sheets of agony sweeping and returning in waves and the horror of unescapable pain expanding like a volcano of madness... Somewhere was someone alive who should be dead. And then in the dark, in absolute silence, Marquis moved a little. He realized, vaguely, that the screaming voice was his own. He stared into the steamy darkness and slowly, carefully, wet his lips. He moved. He felt his lips moving and the whisper sounding loud in the dark. I'm alive! He managed to struggle up out of the bed. He could scarcely remain erect. Every muscle in his body seemed to quiver. He longed to slip down into the darkness and escape into endless sleep. But he'd tried that. And he was still alive. He didn't know how much time had passed. He was sure of the poison's effects, but he wasn't dead. They had gotten to him in time. Sweat exploded from his body. He tried to remember more. Pain. He lay down again. He writhed and perspired on the bed as his tortured mind built grotesque fantasies out of fragments of broken memory. The routine of the unceasing bells went on.' Bells, leap up. Bells, calisthenics. Bells, eat. Bells, march. Bells, work. He tried to shut out the bells. He tried to talk to #I . #I covered up his ears and wouldn't listen. The girl wouldn't listen to him. There were other ways. And he kept the poison hidden in the capsule in his hollow tooth. He had been counting the steps covering the length of the hall, then the twenty steps to the left, then to the right to where the narrow corridor led again to the left where he had seen the air-lock. After the bells stopped ringing and the darkness was all around him, he got up. He counted off the steps. No guards, no alarms, nothing to stop him. They depended on the conditioners to take care of everything. This time he would do it. This time they wouldn't bring him back. No one else could even talk with him about it, even though he knew they all wanted to escape. Some part of them still wanted to, but they couldn't. So it was up to him. He stopped against the smooth, opaque, up-curving glasite dome. It had a brittle bright shine that reflected from the Moon's surface. It was night out there, with an odd metallic reflection of Earthlight against the naked crags. He hesitated. He could feel the intense and terrible cold, the airlessness out there fingering hungrily, reaching and whispering and waiting. He turned the wheel. The door opened. He entered the air-lock and shut the first door when the air-pressure was right. He turned the other wheel and the outer lock door swung outward. The out-rushing air spun him outward like a balloon into the awful airless cold and naked silence. His body sank down into the thick pumice dust that drifted up around him in a fine powdery blanket of concealment. He felt no pain. The cold airlessness dissolved around him in deepening darkening pleasantness. This time he was dead, thoroughly and finally and gloriously dead, even buried, and they couldn't find him. And even if they did finally find him, what good would it do them? Some transcendental part of him seemed to remain to observe and triumph over his victory. This time he was dead to stay. This time he knew at once that the twisting body in the steaming pain, the distorted face, the screams rising and rising were all Charles Marquis. Maybe a dream though, he thought. So much pain, so much screaming pain, is not real. In some fraction of a fraction of that interim between life and death, one could dream of so much because dreams are timeless. Yet he found himself anticipating, even through the shredded, dissociated, nameless kind of pain, a repetition of that other time. The awful bitterness of defeat. was dark, the same darkness. He was on the same bed. And the old familiar dark around and the familiar soundlessness that was now heavier than the most thunderous sound. Everything around him then seemed to whirl up and go down in a crash. He rolled over to the floor and lay there, his hot face cooled by the cold metal. As before, some undeterminable interim of time had passed. And he knew he was alive. His body was stiff. He ached. There was a drumming in his head, and then a ringing in his ears as he tried to get up, managed to drag himself to an unsteady stance against the wall. He felt now an icy surety of horror that carried him out to a pin-point in space. A terrible fatigue hit him. He fell back onto the bed. He lay there trying to figure out how he could be alive. He finally slept pushed into it by sheer and utter exhaustion. The bells called him awake. The bells started him off again. He tried to talk again to #. They avoided him, ail of them. But they weren't really alive any more. How long could he maintain some part of himself that he knew definitely was Charles Marquis? He began a ritual, a routine divorced from that to which all those being indoctrinated were subjected. It was a little private routine of his own. Dying, and then finding that he was not dead. He tried it many ways. He took more grains of the poison. But he was always alive again. "You -- #I ! Damn you -- talk to me! You know what's been happening to me?" The man nodded quickly over his little canisters of food-concentrate. "This indoctrination -- you, the girl -- you went crazy when T talked about dying -- what -- ?" The man yelled hoarsely. "Don't... don't say it! All this -- what you've been going through, can't you understand? All that is part of indoctrination. You're no different than the rest of us! We've all had it! All of us. All of us! Some more maybe than others. It had to end. You'll have to give in. Oh God, I wish you didn't. I wish you could win. But you're no smarter than the rest of us. You'll have to give inf" It was #I 's longest and most coherent speech. Maybe I can get somewhere with him, Marquis thought. I can find out something. But #I wouldn't say any more. Marquis kept on trying. No one, he knew, would ever realize what that meant -- to keep on trying to die when no could would let you, when you kept dying, and then kept waking up again, and you weren't dead. No one could ever understand the pain that went between the dying and the living. And even Marquis couldn't remember it afterward. He only knew how painful it had been. And knowing that made each attempt a little harder for Marquis. He tried the poison again. There was the big stamping machine that had crushed him beyond any semblance of a human being, but he had awakened, alive again, whole again. There was the time he grabbed the power cable and felt himself, in one blinding flash, conquer life in a burst of flame. He slashed his wrists at the beginning of a number of sleep periods. When he awakened, he was whole again. There wasn't even a scar. He suffered the pain of resisting the eating bells until he was so weak he couldn't respond, and he knew that he died that time too -- from pure starvation. But I can't stay dead!... You'll have to give in!" He had no idea now how long he had been here. But a guard appeared, a cold-faced man who guided Marquis back to the office where the fat, pink-faced little Manager waited for him behind the shelf suspended by silver wires from the ceiling. The Manager said. "You are the most remarkable prisoner we've ever had here. There probably will not be another like you here again." Marquis' features hung slack, his mouth slightly open, his lower lip drooping. He knew how he looked. He knew how near he was to cracking completely, becoming a senseless puppet of the bells. "Why is that?" he whispered. "You've tried repeatedly to -- you know what I mean of course. You have kept on attempting this impossible thing, attempted it more times than anyone else here ever has! Frankly, we didn't think any human psyche had the stuff to try it that many times -- to resist that long." The Manager made a curious lengthened survey of Marquis' face. "Soon you'll be thoroughly indoctrinated. You are. for all practical purposes, now. You'll work automatically then, to the bells, and think very little about it at all, except in a few stereotyped ways to keep your brain and nervous system active enough to carry out simple specialized work duties. Or while the New System lasts. And I imagine that will be forever." "Forever..." "Yes, yes. You're immortal now," the Manager smiled. "Surely, after all this harrowing indoctrination experience, you realize that!" Immortal. I might have guessed I might laugh now , but I can't. We who pretend to live in a hell that is worse than death, and you, the Managerials who live in paradise. We two are immortal. "That is. you're immortal as long as we desire you to be. You'll never grow any older than we want you to, never so senile as to threaten efficiency. That was what you were so interested in finding out on Earth, wasn't it? The mystery behind the Managerials? Why they never seemed to grow old. Why we have all the advantage, no senility, no weakening, the advantage of accumulative experience without the necessity of re-learning?" "Yes," Marquis whispered. The Manager leaned back. He lit a paraette and let the soothing nerve-tonic seep into his lungs. He explained. "Every one of you political prisoners we bring here want, above everything else, to die. It was a challenge to our experimental social order here. We have no objection learned that even the will to die can be conditioned out of the most determined rebel. As it has been conditioned out of you. You try to die enough times, and you do die, but the pain of resurrection is so great that finally it is impossible not only to kill yourself, but even to think of attempting it. Marquis couldn't say anything. The memory called up by the mention of self-destruction rasped along his spine like chalk on a blackboard. He could feel the total-recall of sensation, the threatening bursts of pain. "No... he whispered over and over. "No -- please -- no -- " The Manager said. "We won't mention it anymore. You'll never be able to try any overt act of selfdestruction again... The bright light from the ceiling lanced like splinters into the tender flesh of Marquis' eyeballs, danced about the base of his brain in reddened choleric circles. His face had drawn back so that his cheekbones stood out and his nose was beaklike. His irises became; a bright painful blue in the reddened ovals of his eyes. The Manager yawned as he finished explaining. "Each prisoner entering here has an identification punch-plate made of his unique electro-magnetic vibratory field. That's the secret of our immortality and yours. Like all matter, human difference is in the electro-magnetic, vibratory rates. We have these punch-plates on file for every prisoner. We have one of you. Any dead human body we merely put in a tank which dissolves it into separate cells, a mass of stasis with potentiality to be reformed into any type of human being of which we have an identification punch-plate, you see? This tank of dissociated cells is surrounded by an electro-magnetic field induced from a machine by one of the identification punchplates. That particular human being lives again, the body, its mind, its life pattern identical to that from which the original punch-plate was made. Each time you have died, we reduced your body, regardless of its condition, to dissociated cells in the tank. The identification punchplate was put in the machine. Your unique electro-magnetic field reformed the cells into you. It could only be you, as you are now. From those cells we can resurrect any one of whom we have an identification plate. "That is all. No. #. Now that you're indoctrinated, you will work from now on in the food-mart, because of your experience. F OR AN undeterminable length of time, he followed the routines of the bells. In the big food-mart, among the hydroponic beds, and the canning machines; among the food-grinders and little belts that dropped cans of food-concentrate into racks and sent them off into the walls. He managed to talk more and more coherently with No. #. He stopped referring to suicide, but if anyone had the idea that Marquis had given up the idea of dying, they were wrong. Marquis was stubborn. Somewhere in him the flame still burned. He wouldn't let it go out. The bells couldn't put it out. The throbbing machines couldn't put it out. And now he had at last figured out a way to beat the game. During an eating period, Marquis said to #. "You want to die. Wait a minute -- I'm talking about something we can both talk and think about. A murder agreement. You understand? We haven't been other. It's only an overt act of selfdes -- all right, we don't think about that. But we can plan a way to kill each other." #I looked up. He stopped eating momentarily. He was interested. "What's the use though?" Pain shadowed his face. "We only go through it -- come back again -- " "I have a plan. The way I have it worked out, they'll never bring either one of us back." That wasn't exactly true. One of them would have to come back. Marquis hoped that #I wouldn't catch on to the fact that he would have to be resurrected, but that Marquis never would. He hoped that #'s mind was too foggy and dull to see through the complex plan. And that was the way it worked. Marquis explained. #I listened and smiled. It was the first time Marquis had ever seen a prisoner smile. He left what remained of the capsule of poison where #I could get it. During one of the next four eating periods, #I was to slip the poison into Marquis' food can. Marquis wouldn't know what meal, or what can. He had to eat. The bells had conditioned him that much. And not to eat would be an overt act of self-destruction. He wasn't conditioned not to accept death administered by another. And then, after an eating period, #I whispered to him. "You're poisoned. It was in one of the cans you just ate." "Great!" almost shouted Marquis. "All right. Now I'll die by the end of the next work period. That gives us this sleep period and all the next work period. During that time I'll dispose of you as I've said." #I went to his bed and the bells rang and the dark came and both of them slept. ditioners enough to follow Marquis past his regular work room into the food-mart. As planned, #I marched on and stood in the steaming shadows behind the hydroponic beds. Marquis worked for a while at the canning machines, at the big grinding vats. Then he went over to #I and said. "Turn around now." #I smiled. He turned around. "Good luck," he said. "Good luck -- to you!" Marquis hit #I across the back of the neck with an alloy bar and killed him instantly. He changed clothes with the dead man. He put his own clothes in a refuse incinerator. Quickly, he dragged the body over and tossed it into one of the food-grinding vats. His head bobbed up above the gray swirling liquid once, then the body disappeared entirely, was ground finely and mixed with the other foodstuff. Within eight hours the cells of #I would be distributed minutely throughout the contents of thousands of cans of food-concentrate. Within that time much of it would have been consumed by the inmates and Managers. At the end of that work period. Marquis returned to his cell. He went past his own bed and stopped in front of #'s bed. The sleep bells sounded and the dark came again. This would be the final dark. Marquis knew. This time he had beat the game. The delayed-action poison would kill him. He had on # l's clothes with his identification number. He was on #'s bed. He would die -- as #. The guards would finally check on the missing man in the food-mart. But they would never find him. They would find #I dead, a suicide. And they would put the body labeled #I in the tank, dissolve it into dissociated cells and they would subject those cells to the electro-magnetic field of #. And they would resurrect -- #. Not only have I managed to die, Marquis thought, but I've managed the ultimate suicide. There won't even be a body, no sign anywhere that I have ever been at all. Even my cells will have been resurrected as someone else. As a number #. "And that's the way it was," No. #I would tell new prisoners coming in. Sometimes they listened to him and seemed interested, but the interest always died during indoctrination. But No. #'s interest in the story never died. He knew that now he could never let himself die as a human being either, that he could never let himself become completely controlled by the bells. He'd been nearly dead as an individual, but No. # had saved him from that dead-alive anonymity. He could keep alive, and maintain hope now by remembering what # had done. He clung to that memory. As long as he retained that memory of hope -- of triumph -- at least some part of him would keep burning, as something had kept on burning within the heart of #. So every night before the sleep bells sounded, he would go over the whole thing in minute detail, remembering #'s every word and gesture, the details of his appearance. He told the plan over to himself every night, and told everyone about it who came in to the indoctrination ward. Swimming up through the pain of resurrection, he had been a little mad at # at first, and then he had realized that at least the plan had enabled one man to beat the game. "He will always be alive to me. Maybe, in a way, he's part of me. Nobody knows. But his memory will live. He succeeded in a kind of ultimate dying -- no trace of him anywhere. But the memory of him and what he did will be alive when the New System and the Managers are dead. That spirit will assure the Underground of victory -- someday. And meanwhile, I'll keep # alive. "He even knew the psychology of these Managers and their System. That they can't afford to make an error. He knew they'd still have that identification punch-plate of him. That they would have one more plate than they had prisoners. But he anticipated what they would do there too. To admit there was one more identification plate than there w'ere prisoners would be to admit a gross error. Of course they could dissolve one of the other prisoners and use #'s plate and (Continued on page # ) Women of earth had finally attained their objective: a new world all their own and -- without men! But was it?. Thy Name Is By Kenneth O'Hara Illustrated by Zimmerman the hypo and left the ship. Bowcare -- he would be changed by ren lay in absolute darkness wonthen. He would start turning any dering when the change would minute now, becoming something start. There would be pain, the else; he didn't know exactly what, Doctor had said. "Then you won't but that wouldn't matter. After it be aware of anything -- anything at was over, he wouldn't remember beall." cause the higher brain centers, the That was a devil of a thing, Bowcortex, the analytical mind, would ren thought, not to be aware of the be completely cut off, short-cirgreatest adventure any man ever cuited, during the alteration, had. He, Eddie Bowren, the first The cubicle was close, hot, to escape the Earth into space, the sound-proofed, like a tomb. "You first man to Mars! will probably make loud unpleasant He was on his back in a small noises," the Doctor had said, "but square steel cubicle, a secretly conno one will hear you." Don't worry structed room in the wall of the about anything until you get to cargo bin of the big spaceship Mars." cradled at the New Chicago Port. That was right, Bowren thought. He was not without fear. But beMy only problem is to observe, compute, and get back into this dungeon without being observed, and back to Earth. The idea was to keep it from the women. The women wouldn't go for this at all. They would object. The women would be able to bring into effect several laws dealing with spaceflight, among them the one against stowaways, and especially that particular one about aberrated males sneaking into space and committing suicide. A lot of men had tried it, in the beginning. Some of them had managed it, but they had all died. For a long time, the men's egos hadn't been able to admit that the male organism was incapable of standing the rigors of acceleration. Women had had laws passed, and if the women caught him doing this, the punishment would be extreme for him, personally, and a lot more extreme for Earth civilization in general. If you could call it a civilization. You could call it anything, Bowren groaned -- but it didn't make sense. A world without women. A birthrate reduced to zero. A trickle of sweat slid past Bowren's eyes, loosening a nervous flush along his back that prickled painfully. His throat was tense and his heart pounded loud in the hot dark. A sharp pain ran up his body and exploded in his head. He tried to swallow, but something gagged in his throat. He was afraid of retching. He lay with his mouth open, spittle dribbling over his lips. The pain returned, hammered at his entrails. He fought the pain numbly, like a man grappling in the dark. The wave subsided and he lay there gasping, his fists clenched. "The pain will come in increasingly powerful waves," the Doctor had said. "At a certain point, it will be so great, the analytical mind will completely short-circuit. It will stay that way enroute to Mars, and meanwhile your body will rapidly change into that of a beast. Don't worry about it. A catalytic agent will return you to normal before you reach the planet. If you live, you'll be human again." A male human couldn't stand the acceleration. But a woman could. Animals could. They had experimented on human males and animals in the giant centrifuges, and learned what to do. Animals could stand # "G" consistently, or centrifugal forces as high as I # revolutions a minute. About # "G" was the limit of female endurance. Less for men. It had never been thoroughly determined why women had been able to stand higher acceleration. But human females had the same physical advantages over men as female rats, rabbits, and cats over males of the same species. A woman's cellular structure was different; her center of gravity was different, the brain waves given off during acceleration were different. It was suspected that the autonomic nervous system in women could function more freely to protect the body during emergency situations. The only certainty about it was that no man had ever been able to get into space and live. But animals could so they had worked on it and finally they decided to change a man into an animal, at least temporarily. Geneti'-#  I i .nul biochemists and other spe i.i lots had been able to do a lot with hormones and hard radiation treatment. Especially with hormones. You could shoot a man full of some fluid or another, and do almost anything to his organism. You could induce atavism, regression to some lower form of animal life -- a highly speeded up regression. When you did that, naturally the analytical mind, the higher thought centers of a more recent evolutionary development, blanked out and the 'primal mind took oyer. The body changed too, considerably. Bowren was changing. Then the pain came and he couldn't think. He felt his mind cringing -- giving way before the onslaught of the pain. Dimly he could feel the agony in his limbs, the throbbing of his heart, the fading power of reason. He retched, languished through flaccid minutes. There were recurring spasms of shivering as he rolled his thickened tongue in the arid cavity of his mouth. And then, somewhere, a spark exploded, and drowned him in a pool of streaming flame. slowly -- much as it had gone -- in waves of pain. It took a long time. Elements of reason and unreason fusing through distorted nightmares until he was lying there able to remember, able to wonder, able to think. Inside the tiny compartment were supplies. A hypo, glucose, a durolene suit neatly folded which he put on. He gave himself a needle, swallowed the tablets, and waited until energy and a sense of well-being gave him some degree of confidence. It was very still. The ship would be cradled on Mars now. He lay there, relaxing, preparing for the real challenge. He thought of how well the Earth Investigation Committee had planned the whole thing. The last desperate attempt of man to get into space -- to Mars -- a woman's world. At least it was supposed to be. Whatever it was, it wasn't a man's world. The women didn't want Earth anymore. They had something better. But what? There were other questions, and Bowren' s job was to find the answers, remain unobserved and get back aboard this ship. He would then hypo himself again, and when the ship blasted off to Earth, he would go through the same transition all over again. He put on the soft-soled shoes as well as the durolene suit and crawled through the small panel into the big cargo bin. It was empty. Only a dim yellow light shone on the big cargo vices along the curved walls. He climbed the ladders slowly, cautiously, through a gnawing silence of suspense, over the mesh grid flooring along the tubular corridors. He wondered what he would find. Could the women have been influenced by some alien life form on Mars? That could explain the fact that women had divorced themselves completely from all men, from the Earth. Something had to explain it. There was one other possibility. That the women had found human life on Mars. That was a very remote possibility based on the idea that perhaps the Solar system had been settled by human beings from outer space, and had landed on two worlds at least. Bowren remembered how his wife, Lora, had told him he was an idiot and a bore, and had walked out on him five years before; taken her three months course in astrogation, and left Earth. He hadn't heard of her or from her since. It was the same with every other man, married or not. The male ego had taken a beating for so long that the results had been psychologically devastating. The ship seemed to be empty of any human being but Bowren. He reached the outer lock door. It was ajar. Thin cold air came through and sent a chill down his arms, tingling in his fingers. He looked out. It was night on Mars, a strange redtinted night, the double moons throwing streaming color over the land. Across the field, he saw the glowing Luciferin-like light of a small city. Soaring spherical lines. Nothing masculine about its architecture. Bowren shivered. He climbed down the ladder, the air biting into his lungs. The silence down there on the ground under the ship was intense. He stood there a minute. The first man on Mars. Man's oldest dream realized. But the great thrill he had anticipated was dulled somewhat by fear. A fear of what the women had become, and of what might have influenced their becoming. He took out a small neurogun and walked. He reached what seemed to be a huge park that seemed to surround the city. It grew warmer and a soft wind whispered through the strange widespreading trees and bushes and exotic blossoms. The scent of blossoms drifted on the wind and the sound of running water, of murmuring voices. The park thickened as Bowren edged into its dark, languid depth. It seemed as though the city radiated heat. He dodged suddenly behind a tree, knelt down. For an instant he was embarrassed seeing the two shadowy figures in each others arms on a bench in the moonlight. This emotion gave way to shock, anger, fear. One of them was a -- man! Bowren felt the perspiration start from his face. An intense jealousy surrendered to a start of fearful curiosity. Where had the man come from? Bowren's long frustration, the memory of his wife, the humiliation, the rejection, the abandonment, the impotent rage of loneliness -- it all came back to him. He controlled his emotion somehow. At least he didn't manifest it physically. He crept closer, listened. I I "This was such a sweet idea," the woman was whispering. "Bringing me here to the park tonight. That's why I love you so, Marvin. You're always so romantic." "How else could I think of you, darling," the man said. His voice was cultured, precise, soft, thick with emotion. "You're so sweet, Marvin." "You're so beautiful, darling. I think of you every minute that you're away on one of those space flights. You women are so wonderful to have conquered space, but sometimes I hate the ships that take you away from me." The woman sighed. "But it's so nice to come back to you. So exciting, so comfortable." The kiss was long and deep. Bowren backed away, almost smashing into the tree. He touched his forehead. He was sweating heavily. His beard dripped moisture, There was a hollow panicky feeling in his stomach. Now he was confused as well as afraid. Another couple was sitting next to a fountain, and a bubbling brook ran past them, singing into the darkness. Bowren crouched behind a bush and listened. It might have been the man he had just left, still talking. The voice was slightly difrent, but the dialogue sounded very much the same. "It must be wonderful to be a woman, dear, and voyage between the stars. But as I say, I'm glad to stay here and tend the home and mind the children, glad to be here, my arms open to you when you come back." "It's so wonderful to know that you care so much. I'm so glad you never let me forget that you love me." "I love you, every minute of every day. Just think -- two more months and one week and we will have been married ten years." "It's so lovely," she said. "It seems like ten days. Like those first over and over again." "I'll always love you. darling." "Always?" "Always." The man got up, lifted the woman in his arms, held her high. "Darling, let's go for a night ride across the desert." "Oh, you darling. You always think of these little adventures." "All life with you is an adventure." "But what about little Jimmie and Janice?" "I've arranged a sitter for them." "But darling -- you mean you -- Oh, you're so wonderful. You think of everything. So practical, yet so romantic... so -- " He kissed her and ran away, holding her high in the air, and her laughter bubbled back to where Bowren crouched behind the bush. He kept on crouching there, staring numbly at the vacancy the fleeing couple had left in the shadows. "Good God," he whispered. "After ten years -- " He shook his head and slowly licked his lips. He'd been married five years. It hadn't been like this. He'd never heard of any marriage maintaining such a crazy high romantic level of manic neuroticism as this for very long. Of course the women had always expected it to. But the men -- And anyway -- where did the men come from? ing lane between exotic blossoms, through air saturated with the damp scent of night-blooming flowers. He walked cautiously enough, but in a kind of daze, his mind spinning. The appearance of those men remained in his mind. When he closed his eyes for a moment, he could see them. Perfectly groomed, impeccably dressed, smiling, vital, bronzeskinned, delicate, yet strong features; the kind of male w'ho might be considered, Bowren thought, to be able to assert just the right degree of aggressiveness without being indelicate. Why, he thought, they've found perfect men, their type of men. He dodged behind a tree. Here it was again. Same play, same scene practically, only the players were two other people. A couple standing arm in arm beside a big pool full of weird darting fish and throwing upward a subdued bluish light. Music drifted along the warm currents of air. The couple were silhouetted by the indirect light. The pose is perfect, he thought. The setting is perfect. "You're so wonderful, darling," the man was saying, "and I get so lonely without you. I always see your face, hear your voice, no matter how long you're away." "Do you? Do you?" "Always. Your hair so red, so dark it seems black in certain lights. Your eyes so slanted, so dark a green they seem black usually too. Your nose so straight, the nostrils flaring slightly, the least bit too much sometimes. Your mouth so red and full. Your skin so smooth and dark. And you're ageless, darling. Being married to you five years, it's one exciting adventure." "I love you so," she said. "You're everything any woman could want in a husband. Simply everything, yet you're so modest with it all. I still remember how it used to be. Back there... with the other men I mean?" "You should forget about them, my dear." "I'm forgetting, slowly though. It may take a long time to forget completely. Oh, he was such an unpleasant person, so uninteresting after a while. So inconsiderate, so self-rentcred. He wasn't romantic at all. He never said he loved me, and when he kissed me it was mere routine. lie never thought about anything but his work, and when he did come home at night, he would yell at me about not having ordered the right dinner from the cafelator. He didn't care whether he used hair remover on his face in the mornings or not. He was surly and sullen and selfish. But I could have forgiven everything else if he had only told me every day that he loved me, that he could never love anyone else. The things that you do and say, darling." "I love you," he said. "I love you, I love you. But please, let's not talk about him anymore. It simply horrifies me!" Bowren felt the sudden sickening throbbing of his stomach. The description. Now the slight familiarity of voice. And then he heard the man say, murmuring. "Lois... darling Lois..." Bowren shivered. His jowls darkened, his mouth pressed thin by the powerful clamp of his jaws. His body seemed to loosen all over and he fell into a crouch. Tiredness and torn nerves and long-suppressed emotion throbbed in him, and all the rage and suppression and frustration came back in a wave. He yelled. It was more of a sound, a harsh prolonged animal roar of pain and rage and humiliation. "Lois..." He ran forward. She gasped, sank away as Bowren hit the man, hard. The man sighed and gyrated swinging his arms, teetering and flipped backward into the pool among the lights and the weird fish. A spray of cold water struck Bowren, sobering him a little, sobered his burst of mindless passion enough that he could hear the shouts of alarm ringing through the trees. He turned desperately. Lois cringed. He scarcely remembered her now, he realized. She was different. He had forgotten everything except an image that had changed with longing. She hadn't been too impressive anyway, maybe, or maybe she had. It didn't matter now. He tried to run, tried to get away. He heard Lois' voice, high and shrill. Figures closed in around him. He fought, desperately. He put a few temporarily out of the way with the neurogun, but there were always more. Men, men everywhere. Hundreds of men where there should be no men at all. Wellgroomed, strong, bronzed, eversmiling men. It gave him intense pleasure to crack off a few of the smiles. To hurl the gun, smash with his fists. Then the men were swarming all over him, the clean faces, the smiling fragrant men, and he went down under the weight of men. He tried to move. A blow fell hard and his head smashed against the rocks. He tried to rise up, and other blows beat him down and he was glad about the darkness, not because it relieved the pain, but because it curtained off the faces of men. though he was being carried through a dim half-consciousness, able to think, too tired to move or open his eyes. He remembered how the men of Earth had rationalized a long time, making a joke out of it. Laughing when they hadn't wanted to laugh, but to hate. It had never been humorous. It had been a war between the sexes, and the women had finally won, destroying the men psychologically, the race physically. Somehow they had managed to go on with a culture of their own. The war between the sexes had never really been a joke. It had been deadly serious, right from the beginning of the militant feminist movements, long before the last big war. There' had always been basic psychological and physiological differences. But woman had refused to admit this, and had tried to be the "equal" if not the better of men. For so long woman had made it strictly competitive, and in her subconscious mind she had regarded men as wonderful creatures, capable of practically anything, and that woman could do nothing better than to emulate them in every possible way. There was no such thing as a woman's role unless it had been the same as a man's. That had gone on a long time. And it hadn't been a joke at all. How ironic it was, there at the last! All of man's work through the ages had been aimed at the stars. And the women had assumed the final phase of conquest! For a long time women had been revolting against the masculine symbols, the levers, pistons, bombs, torpedoes and hammers, all manifestations of man's whole activity of overt, aggressive power. The big H-bombs of the last great war had seemed to be man's final symbol, destructive. And after that, the spaceships, puncturing space, roaring outward, the ultimate masculine symbol of which men had dreamed for so long, and which women had envied. And then only the women could stand the acceleration. It was a physiological fact. Nothing could change it. Nothing but what they had done to Bowren. All of man's evolutionary struggle, and the women had assumed the climax, assumed all the past wrapped up in the end, usurped the effect, and thereby psychologically assuming also all the thousands of years of causation. For being held down, being made neurotic by frustration and the impossibility of being the "equal" of men, because they were fundamentally psychologically and physiologically different, women had taken to space with an age-old vengeance. Personal ego salvation. But they hadn't stopped there. What had they done? What about the men? A man for every woman, yet no men from Earth. That much Bowren knew. Native Martians? What? He had been transported somewhere in a car of some kind. He didn't bother to be interested. He couldn't get away. He was held fast. He refused to open his eyes because he didn't want to see the men who held him, the men who had replaced him and every other man on Earth. The men who were destroying the civilization of Earth. The gimmicks whereby the women had rejected Earth and left it to wither and die in neglect and bitter, bitter wonderment. He was tired, very tired. The movement of the car lulled him, and he drifted into sleep. He opened his eyes and slowly looked around. Pretty pastel ceiling. A big room, beautiful and softly furnished, with a marked absence of metal, of shiny chrome, of harshness or brittle angles. It was something of an office, too, with a desk that was not at all business-like, but still a desk. A warm glow suffused the room, and the air was pleasantly scented with natural smelling perfumes. A woman stood in the middle of the room studying him with detached interest. She was beautiful, but in a hard, mature, withdrawn way. She was dark, her eyes large, liquid black and dominating her rather small sharply-sculptured face. Her mouth was large, deeply red. She had a strong mouth. He looked at her a while. He felt only a deep, bitter resentment. He felt good though, physically. He had probably been given something, an injection. He sat up. Then he got to his feet. She kept on studying him. "A change of clothes, dry detergent, and hair remover for your face are in there, through that door," she said. He said: "Right now I'd rather talk." "But don't you want to take off that awful -- beard?" "The devil with it! Is that so important? It's natural isn't it for a man to have hair on his face? I like hair on my face." She opened her mouth a little and stepped back a few steps. "And anyway, what could be less important right now than the way I look?" "I'm -- I'm Gloria Munsel," she said hesitantly. "I'm President of the City here. And what is your name, please?" "Eddie Bowren. What are you going to do with me?" She shrugged. "You act like a mad man. I'd almost forgotten what you men of Earth were like. I was pretty young then. Well, frankly, I don't know what we're going to do with you. No precedent for the situation. No laws concerning it. It'll be up to the Council." "It won't be pleasant for me," he said, "I can be safe in assuming that." She shrugged again and crossed her arms. He managed to control his emotions somehow as he looked at the smooth lines of her body under the long clinging gown. She was so damn beautiful! A high proud body in a smooth pink gown, dark hair streaming back and shiny and soft. a long time, for him, for all the others. "Let me out of here!" he yelled harshly. "Put me in a room by myself!" She moved closer to him and looked into his face. The fragrance of her hair, the warmth of her reached out to him. Somehow, he never knew how, he managed to grin. He felt the sweat running down his dirty, bearded, battered face. His suit was tom and dirty. He could smell himself, the stale sweat, the filth. He could feel his hair, shaggy and long, down his neck, over his ears. Her lips were slightly parted, and wet, and she had a funny dark look in her eyes, he thought. She turned quickly as the door opened, and a man came in. He was only slightly taller than Gloria and he nodded, smiled brightly, bowed a little, moved forward. He carried a big bouquet of flowers and presented them to her. She took the flowers, smiled, thanked him, and put them on the table. The man said. "So sorry, darling, to intrude. But I felt I had to see you for a few minutes. I left the children with John, and dashed right up here. I thought we might have lunch together." "You're so thoughtful, dear," she said. The man turned a distasteful look upon Bowren. He said. "My dear, what is this?" "A man," she said, and then added. "From Earth." "What? Good grief, you mean they've found a way -- ?" "I don't know. You'd better go back home and tend the yard today, Dale. I'll tell you all about it when I come home this evening. All right?" "Well I -- oh, oh yes, of course, if you say so, darling." "Thank you, dear." She kissed him and he bowed out. She turned and walked back toward Bowren. "Tell me," she said. "How did you get here alive?" Why not tell her? He was helpless here. They'd find out anyway, as soon as they got back to Earth on the cargo run. And even if they didn't find out, that wouldn't matter either. They would be on guard from now on. No man would do again what Bowren had done. The only chance would be to build secret spaceships of their own and everytime one blasted, have every member of the crew go through what Bowren had. It couldn't last. Too much injury and shock. As he talked he studied the office, and he thought of other things. An office that was like a big beautiful living room. A thoroughly feminine office. Nor was it the type of office a woman would fix for a man. It was a woman's office. Everything, the whole culture here, was feminine. When he had finished she said. "Interesting. It must have been a very unpleasant experience for you." He grinned. "I suffered. But even though I've failed, it's worth all the suffering, if you'll tell me -- where did all the ah -- men come from?" She told him. It was, to say the least, startling, and then upon reflection, he realized how simple it all was. No aliens. No native Martians. A very simple and thoroughly logical solution, and in a way, typically feminine. Hormone treatment and genetic manipulation, plus a thorough reconditioning while the treatment was taking place. And the women had simply turned approximately half of their number into men! She paused, then went on. "Ii was the only way we could see it, Mr. Bowren. Earth was a man's world, and we could never have belonged in it, not the way we wanted to. Men wouldn't stand it anyway, down there, having us going into space, usurping their masculine role. And anyway -- you men of Earth had become so utterly unsatisfactory as companions, lovers, and husbands, that it was obvious nothing could ever be done about it. Not unless we set up our own culture, our own civilization, our way." "But meanwhile we die down there," Bowren said. "Logic is nice. But mass murder, and the death of a whole world civilization seems pretty cold from where I'm standing. It's pathological, but it's too late to think about that. It's done now." "But we're happy here," she said. "For the first time in a long, long time, we women feel like ourselves. We feel truly independent. The men around us are the kind of men we want, instead of us being what they want us to be, or even worse, the men being what we want them to be but resenting it and making life unbearable for both. All through the process of being changed into men, our women undergo such a thorough conditioning that they can never be anything else but model men in every sense. Their attitude as women with which they started treatment helped. They knew what they wanted in men, and they became what we wanted them to be, as men." "Very logical," Bowren said. "It smells to heaven it's so logical." It was purely impulse, what he did then. He couldn't help it. It wasn't logical either. It was emotional and he did it because he had to do it and because he didn't see any reason why he shouldn't. He put his arm out suddenly, hooked her slim waist, and pulled her to him. Her face flushed and his eyes were very wide and dark as she looked up at him. "Listen," he said. "The whole thing's insane. The lot of you are mad, and though I can't help it, I hate to see it happen this way. What kind of men are these? These smiling robots, these goons who are nothing else but reflections in a woman's mirror? Who'd want to be a man like that. Who would really want a man like that? And who would want a woman who was just what a man wanted her to be? Where's the fire? Where's the individuality? Where's the conflict, the fighting and snarling and raging that makes living. All this is apathy, this is death! You don't grow by being agreeable, but by conflict." "What are you trying to sell now?" she whispered. He laughed. It was wild sounding to him, not very humorous really, but still it was laughter. "Selling nothing, buying nothing." He pulled her closer and kissed her. Her lips parted slightly and he could feel the warmth of her and the quick drawing of breath. Then she pushed him away. She raised her hand and brushed it over his face. She shook her head slowly. "It feels rather interesting," she said, "your face. I've never felt a man's face before, that wasn't smooth, the way it should be." He laughed again, more softly this time. "Why reform your men? You women always wanted to do that." "We don't reform men here," she said. "We start them out right -- from the beginning." She backed away from him. She raised her hand to her face and her fingers touched her lips. Wrinkles appeared between her eyes and she shook her head again. Not at him, but at something, a thought perhaps, he couldn't tell. Finally she said. "That was an inexcusable, boorish thing to do. A typical thoughtless egomanical Earth-male action if there ever was one. Our men are all perfect here, and in comparison to them, you're a pretty miserable speciman. I'm glad you showed up here. It's given me, and other women, a good chance for comparison. It makes our men seem so much better even than they were to us before." He didn't say anything. "Our men are perfect! Perfect you understand? What are you smiling about? Their character is good. They're excellent conversationalists, well informed, always attentive, moderate, sympathetic, interested in life, and always interested in us." "And I suppose they are also -- human?" "This is nonsense," she said, her voice rising slightly. "You will take that door out please. The Council will decide what's to be done with you." He nodded, turned, and went through the door. There were two men there waiting for him. They were both blond, with, light blue eyes, just medium height,, perfectly constructed physically, perfectly groomed, impeccably dressed. They smiled at him. Their teeth had been brushed every morning. One of them wrinkled his nose, obviously as a reaction to Bowren. The other started to reach, seemed reluctant to touch him. "Then don't touch me, brother," Bowren said. "Put a hand on me, and I'll slug you." The man reached away, and it gave Bowren an ecstatic sensation to send his fist against the man's jaw. It made a cracking sound and the man's head flopped back as his knees crumbled and he swung around and stretched out flat on his face on the long tubular corridor. "Always remember your etiquette," Bowren said. "Keep your hands off people. It isn't polite." The other man grunted something, still managing to smile, as he rushed at Bowren. Bowren sidestepped, hooked the man's neck in his arm and ran him across the hall and smashed his head into the wall. He turned, opened the door into Munsel's office, dragged both of them in and shut the door again. He walked down the corridor several hundred feet before a woman appeared, in some kind of uniform, and said. "Will you come this way please?" He said he would. ably furnished. Food came through a panel in the wall whenever he pressed the right button. A telescreen furnished entertainment when he pushed another button. Tasty mixed drinks responded to other buttons. He never bothered to take advantage of the facilities offered for removing his beard, bathing, or changing clothes. Whatever fate was going to befall him, he would just as soon meet it as the only man on Mars who looked the part -- according to Bowren's standards, at least -- at least by comparison. He thought of trying to escape. If he could get away from the city and into the Martian hills, he could die out there with some dignity. It was a good idea, but he knew it was impossible. At least so far, it was impossible. Maybe something would come up. An opportunity and he would take it. That was the only thing left for him. He was in there for what seemed a long time. It was still, the light remaining always the same. He slept a number of times and ate several times. He did a lot of thinking too. He thought about the men on Earth and finally he decided it didn't matter much. They had brought it on themselves in a way, and if there was anything like cause and effect operating on such a scale, they deserved no sympathy. Man had expressed his aggressive male ego until he evolved the H-bombs and worse, and by then the whole world was neurotic with fear, including the women. Women had always looked into the mirror of the future (or lack of it), of the race, and the more she had looked, the more the insecurity. The atomic wars had created a kind of final feeling of insecurity as far as men were concerned, forced them to become completely psychologically and physiologically self-sufficient. They had converted part of their own kind into men, their own kind of men, and theoretically there wouldn't be any more insecurity brought on by the kind of male psychology that had turned the Earth around for so long. All right, drop it right there then, he thought. It's about all over. It's all over but the requiem. Sometime later he was in a mood where he didn't mind it when an impersonal face appeared on the screen and looked right at him and told him the Council's verdict. It was a woman, and her voice was cold, very cold. "Mr. Eddie Bowren. The Council has reached a verdict regarding what is to be done with you. You are to be exterminated. It is painless and we will make it as pleasant as possible." "Thanks," Bowren said. A woman's world was so polite, so mannerly, so remembering of all the social amenities. It yvould be so difficult after a while to know when anyone was speaking, or doing anything real. "Thanks," he said again. "I will do all in my power to make my extermination a matter of mutual pleasure." By now he was pretty drunk, had been drunk for some time. He raised his glass. "Here's to a real happy time of it, baby." The screen faded. He sat there brooding, and he was still brooding when the door unlocked and opened softly. He sat there and looked at Gloria Munsel for a while, wondering why she was here. Why she would look so provocative, so enchanting, so devastating, whatever other words you cared to dream up. She moved toward him with a slight swaying motion that further disturbed him. He felt her long white fingers rubbing over the stiff wiry beard of his face. "I dreamed about the way that beard felt last night," she said. "Silly of me wasn't it? I heard of the way you smell, of the way you yelled at me, so impolitely. Why did I dream of it, I said this morning, so now I'm here to find out why." "Get out and let me alone," Bowren yelled. "I'm going to be exterminated. So let me alone to my own company." "Yes, I heard about that verdict," she said. She looked away from him. "I don't know why they made that choice. Well, I do in a way, they're afraid of you, your influence. It would be very disruptive socially. Several of our men -- " "It doesn't matter why," Bowren said. "What matters is that it will be as pleasant as possible. If you're going to kill a man, be nice about it." She stared down at him. Chills rippled down his back as her warm soft fingers continued to stroke his bearded chin and throat. He got up. It was too uncomfortable and it was torture. He said, "Get out of here. Maybe I'm not a conformist, but I'm damn human!" She backed away. "But -- but what do you mean?" He got up and put the flat of his hands cupping her shoulder blades. Her eyes stared wildly, and her lips were wet and she was breathing heavily. He could see the vein pulsing faster in her slim throat. She had an exciting body. He saw it then, the new slow smile that crept across her face. His left hand squirmed at the thick piled hair on her shoulders and he tugged and her face tilted further and he looked at the parted pouting lips. The palm of his right hand brushed her jaw and his fingers took her cheeks and brought her face over and he spread his mouth hard over her mouth. Her lips begged. Hammers started banging away in his stomach. Music from the screen was playing a crescendo into his pulse. They swayed together to the music, her head thrown back, her eyes closed. She stepped back, dropped her arms limply at her sides. There was the clean sweet odor of her hair. "I'd better go now," she whispered. "Before I do something that would result in my not being President anymore." he thought. The devil with her and the rest. A man could lose everything, all the women, not one, but all of them. He could live alone, a thousand miles from nowhere, at the North Pole like Amundsen, and it didn't matter. He could be killed pleasantly or unpleasantly, that didn't matter either. All that mattered was that he maintain some dignity, as a man. He stood there, not saying anything. He managed to grin. Finally he said, "Goodbye, and may your husband never say a harsh word to you or do anything objectionable as long as you both shall live, and may he love you every hour of every day, and may he drop dead." She moved in again, put her arms around him. There were tears in her eyes. She placed her cheek on his shoulder. "I love you," she whispered. "I know that now." He felt a little helpless. Tears, what could you do with a woman's tears? She sobbed softly, talking brokenly. Maybe not to him, but to someone, somewhere. A memory, a shadow out of a long time back... "Maybe it's... it's all a mistake after all... maybe it is.' I've never been too sure, not for a while now. And then you -- the way you talked and looked -- the excitement. I don't know why. But the touch of your beard -- your voice. I don't know what happened. We've carried it to extremes, extremes, Eddie. It was always this way with us -- once we were sure of our man, and even before, when he was blinded by new love, we tried to make him over, closer to our idea of what was right. But now I know something... those faults and imperfections, most of them were men's, the real mens' chief attractions. Individuality, that's the thing, Eddie, that's it after all. And it's imperfections too, maybe more than anything else. Imperfections... Oh, Eddie, you're close, much closer to human nature, to real vitality, through your imperfections. Not imperfections. Eddie -- your beard is beautiful, your dirt is lovely, your yelling insults are wonderful -- and..." She stopped a minute. Her hands ran through his hair, "When you get a man made over, he's never very nice after that, Eddie. Never -- " She sobbed, pulled his lips down. "Eddie -- I can't let them kill you." "Forget it," he said. "No one can do anything. Don't get yourself in a jam. You'll forget this in a little while. There's nothing here for a guy like me, and I'm not for you." She stepped way, her hands still on his shoulders. "No -- I didn't mean that. I've got to go on living in the world I helped make, among the men we all decided we would always want. I've got to do that. Listen, Eddie, how did you intend to get back to Earth?" He told her. "Then it's just a matter of getting back aboard that same ship, and into this secret room unobserved ?" "That's all, Gloria. That and keep from being exterminated first." "I can get you out of here. We'll have to do it right now. Take that beard off, and get that hair smoothed down somehow. I hate to see it happen, but I've got to get you out of here, and the only way to do it is for you to be like one of the men here." He went to work on his face and hair. She went out and returned with a suit like the other men wore. He got into it. She smiled at him, a hesitant and very soft smile, and she kissed him before they left the room and cautiously went out of the City. The way was clear across the moonlit field and under the deep dark shadow of the ship. He kissed her and then took hold of the ladder. She slipped a notebook of velonex, full of micro-film, into his hands. "Goodbye, Eddie," she said. "Take this with you. It may give you men down there a way out. I never thought much before of how mad it must be for you." He took the folder. He looked up at the double moons painting the night a fantastic shifting wave of changing light. And then he looked down at Gloria Munsel again, at the glinting shine of her hair. "Goodbye," he said. "I might stay after all -- except that a lot of men on Earth are waiting for me to tell them something. They'll be surprised. I -- " He hesitated. Her eyes widened. Warmth of emotion moved him and he said, or started to say, "I love you," and many other things, but she interrupted him. "Don't please, Eddie. Anything you said now would sound just like what my devoted husband says, every day. I'd rather you wouldn't say anything at all now, Eddie, just goodbye."  "Goodbye then," he said again. He looked back from the opened door in the ship's cargo bin. Her face was shining up at him, her lips slightly parted, her cheeks wet. It was a picture he would never be able to forget, even if he wanted to. "When you forget to shave in the mornings, Eddie, think of me." dressed the investigation committee which had sent him to Mars. He hadn't made any statements at all up to this moment. The ten members of the Committee sat there behind the half-moon table. None of them moved. Their faces were anxious. Some of them were perspiring. Eddie told them what he had seen, what he had heard, his own impressions about the whole thing, about his escape. He left out certain personal details that were, to him, unnecessary to this particular report. The Committee sat there a while, then started to talk. They talked at once for a while, then the Chairman rapped for order and stood up. His face had an odd twist to it. and his bald head was pocked with perspiration. Eddie Bowren took the book of micro-film from under his arm, the one Gloria Munsel had given him. He put it on the table. "That has been thoroughly checked by scientists, and their report is included. I thought it surely was a false report, until they checked it. The first page there gives a brief outline of what the micro-film contains." The Chairman read, then looked up. He coughed. He mopped at his head. Eddie said. "As I saw it up there, this is the way it's going to stay. We'll never get into space, not without using the methods that were used with me. And they're too destructive. I've been examined. I could never go through it again and live. And that's the only way Earth men can ever get into space. The women aren't coming back to us. They have husbands of their own now. Believe me, those women aren't going to leave their perfect husbands. They've set up a completely feminine culture. It's theirs, all theirs. They'll never give it up to return to a masculine world, and that's what Earth will always be to them. There are only a few women left on Earth, and they're of such subnormal intelligence as to be only a menace to any possible future progeny. Our birthrate has stopped. We arc living under extremely abnormal circumstances without women. I have, as I said before, but one recommendation to this Committee, and you take it for what it's worth. I personally don't care -- much -- and that isn't important either." "What i your recommendation, Bowren?" "I assure you that the formulas in that book will work for us, Mr. Chairman. Will you accept the reports of the scientists who investigated those formulas?" "I will," the Chairman said hoarsely. "I'll accept it. Why not -- ?" Bowren grinned thinly at the ten men. "There's the secret of doing what the women have done. It'll work for us too. Our only chance for survival is to follow their procedure. We've got to start turning at least a percentage of ourselves into women." One man leaned forward and put his head on his arms. The others sat there, in a kind of stunned numb attitude, their eyes drifting vaguely. The Chairman coughed and looked around the silent hall, and at the other ten men in it. "Any volunteers?" he whispered. There were but three days in which to decipher the most cryptic message ever delivered to earth . the flashing red light on the instrument panel as he turned onto the bridge to Balboa Island. Just over the bridge, he pulled the car to the curb and flipped the switch with violence. "Harrison," he muttered. "How's the water, fella?" asked the voice of Bob Mills, his assistant. There was a beautiful moon over the island. The surf lapped at the tiers of the picturesque bridge. Soft music was playing somewhere. There was a tinkle of young laughter on the light sea breeze. Harrison was vacationing and he viewed the emergency contact from Intersolar Spaceport with annoyance. "What do you want, Bob?" "Sorry, George," Bob Mills said more seriously. "I guess you got to come back." "Listen -- " protested Harrison. "Orders, George -- orders from upstairs." Harrison took a long look at the pleasant island street stretching out before him. Sea-corroded street lamps lit the short, island thoroughfare. People in light blue jeans, bronzed youths in skipper caps, deep-tanned girls in terry-cloth. "What the hell is it?" "Don't know, but it's big. Better hurry." He clicked off. Harrison skidded the car into a squealing turn. Angrily, he raced over the bridge and onto the roaring highway. Thirty minutes later Intersolar Spaceport, Los Angeles, blazed ahead of him. The main gate guards waved him in immediately and two cycle guards ran interference for him through the scores of video newsmen who lined the spaceport street. Bob Mills met him at the entrance to the Administration building. "Sorry, George, but -- " "Yeah. Oh, sure. Now what the hell is it all about?" Mills handed him a sheaf of teletransmittals. They bore heavy secret stamps. Harrison looked up quizzically. "You saw the video boys," Mills said. "The wheels think there might be some hysteria." "Any reason for it?" "Not that we know of -- not that I know of anyway. The thing is coming in awfully fast -- speed of light times a factor of at least two, maybe four." Harrison whistled softly and scanned the reports frowning. "They contacted us -- " "What?" " -- in perfect Intersolar Convention code. Said they were coming in. That's all. The port boys have done all they could to find out what to expect and prepare for it. Somebody thought Engineering might be needed -- that's why they sent for you." "Used Intersolar Convention code, eh," mused Harrison. "Yes," said Mills. "But there's nothing like this thing known in the solar system, nothing even close to this fast. Besides that, there was a sighting several days ago that's being studied. "One of the radio observatories claims to have received a new signal from one of the star clusters..." to a perfect contact with its assigned strip. It hovered over the geometric center of the long runway and touched without raising a speck of dust. Not a sound, not a puff of smoke issued from any part of it. Immediately it rose a few feet above the concrete and began to move toward the parking strip. It moved with the weightless ease of an ancient dirigible on a still day. It was easily the largest, strangest object ever seen before at the spaceport. A team of searchlight men swivelled the large spot atop the tower and bathed the ship in orange light. "What's that mean?" asked Mills paging his way through a book. " 'Halt propulsion equipment,' I think," said Harrison. "It's a good thing the code makers were vague about that," smiled Mills. "It's a good thing they didn't say jets or rockets -- 'cause this thing hasn't got any." " Attention !" That single word suddenly issued from the alien ship. "The Races of Wan greet you." It might have been the voice of a frog. It was low, gutteral, entirely alien, entirely without either enthusiasm or trace of human emotion. "Jesus!" muttered Mills. Scores of video teams focused equipment on the gleaming alien. "The Races of Wan desire contact with you." "In English yet!" amazed Mills. "The basis of this contact together with its nature are dependent upon you!" The voice had become ugly. There was nothing human about it save only the words, which were in flawless English. "Your system has long been under surveillance by the Races of Wan. Your -- progress has been noted." There was almost a note of contempt, thought Harrison, in the last sentence. "Your system is about to reach others. It therefore becomes a matter of urgency that the Races of Wan make contact. "Your cultural grasp is as yet quite small. You reach four of your own system's planets. You have attempted -- with little success -- colonization. You anticipate further penetrations. "You master the physical conditions of your system with difficulty. You are a victim of many of the natural laws -- natural laws which you dimly perceive. "But you master yourselves with greatest difficulty, and you are Infinitely more a victim of forces within your very nature -- forces which you know almost not at all." "What the hell -- " began Mills. "Because of this disparity your maturity as a race is much in doubt. There are many among the cultures of the stars who would consider your race deviant and deadly. There are a very few who would welcome you to the reaches of space. "But most desire more information. Thus our visit. We have come to gather data that will determine your -- disposition -- "Your race accepts the principle of extermination. You relentlessly seek and kill for commercial or political advantage. You live in mistrust and envy and threat. Yet, as earthlings, you have power. It is not great, but it contains a threat. We wish now to know the extent of that threat. "Here is the test." Suddenly an image resolved itself on the gleaming metal of the ship itself. It was a blueprint. A hundred cameras focused on it. "Construct this. It is defective. Correct that which renders it not useful. We shall return in three days for your solution ." "Good God!" exclaimed Harrison. "It's a -- sword!" "A what?" asked Mills. "A sword -- people used to chop each other's heads off with them." Almost at once the metal giant was seen to move. Quickly it retraced its path across the apron, remained poised on the center of the runway, then disappeared almost instantaneously. T he intersolar council weathered the storm. The representative of the colony on Venus was recalled, his political life temporarily ended. A vigilante committee did for a time picket the spaceport. But the tremendous emotional outbursts of the first day gradually gave way to a semblance of order. Video speakers, some of them with huge followings, still dealien to land in the first place. Others clamored for a fleet to pursue the arrogant visitor. And there were many fools who chose to ignore the implications of the strange speech and its implied threat. Some even thought it was a gigantic hoax. But most men soon came to restore their trust in the scientists of the Intersolar Council. Harrison cast down the long sheet of morning news that had rolled out of the machine. "The fools! They'll play politics right up to the last, won't they?" "What else?" asked Mills. "Playing politics is as good a way as any of avoiding what you can't figure out or solve." "And yet, what the hell are we doing here?" Harrison mused. "Listen to this." He picked up a stapled sheaf of papers from his desk. " 'Analysis of word usage indicates a complete knowledge of the isn't it? "The ideational content and general semantic tone of the alien speech indicates a relatively high intelligence. "'Usage is current, precise...' Bob, the man who wrote that report is one of the finest semantics experts in the solar system. He's the brain that finally broke that ancient Martian ceremonial language they found on the columns." "Well, mastermind," said Mills. "What will the Engineering report say when you get around to writing it?" "Engineering report? What are you talking about?" "You didn't read the memo on your desk then? The one that requested a preliminary report from every department by # today." "Good God, no," said Harrison snapping up the thin yellow sheet. "What in hell has a sword got to do with Engineering?" "What's it got to do with Semantics?" mocked Robert Mills. Construct this. It is defective. Correct that which renders it not useful. Harrison's eyes burned. He would have to quit pretty soon and dictate the report. There wasn't any use in trying to go beyond a certain point. You got so damned tired you couldn't think straight. You might as well go to bed and rest. Bob Mills had gone long before. He poured over the blueprint again, striving to concentrate. Why in hell had he not given up altogether? What possible contribution could an engineer make toward the solution of such a problem? Construct this. You simply made the thing according to a simple blueprint. You tried out what you got, found out what it was good for, found out then what was keeping it from doing that. You fixed it. Well, the sword had been constructed. Fantastic effort had been directed into producing a perfect model of the print. Every minute convolution had been followed to an incredible point of perfection. was less than a ten thousandths error -- even in the handle, where the curves seemed to be more artistic than mechanical. It is defective. What was defective about it? Nobody had actually tried the ancient weapon, it was true. You didn't go around chopping people's heads off. But experts on such things had examined the twelve-pound blade and had pronounced it "well balanced" -- whatever that meant. It would crack a skull, sever arteries, kill or maim. Correct What was there to correct? Could you make it maim or kill better? Could you sharpen it so that it would go through thick clothing or fur? Yes. Could you make it a bit heavier so that it might slice a metal shield? Yes, perhaps. All of these things had been half-heartedly suggested. But nobody had yet proposed any kind of qualitative change or been able to suggest any kind of change that would meet the next admonition of the alien: Correct that which renders it not useful. What actually could be done to a weapon to make it useful? Matter of fact, what was there about the present weapon that made it not useful. Apparently it was useful as hell -- useful enough to cut a man's throat, pierce his heart, slice an arm off him . What were the possible swords; what was the morphology of concept sword? Harrison picked up a dog-cared report. There was the rapier , a thin, light, extremely flexible kind of sword (if you considered the word "sword" generic, as the Semantics expert had pointed out). It was good for duels, man-to-man combat, usually on what the ancients had called the "field of honor." There were all kinds of short swords, dirks, shivs, stilettos, daggers. They were the weapons of stealth men -- and sometimes women -- used in the night. The assassin's weapon, the glitter in the darkened alley. There were the machetes. Jungle knives, cane-cutting instruments. The bayonets... You could go on and on from there, apparently. But what did you get? They were all more or less useful, Harrison supposed. There was nothing more you could do with any kind of sword that was designed for a specific purpose. Harrison sighed in despair. He had expected vastly more when he had first heard the alien mention "test". He had expected some complex instrument, something new to Terra and her colonies. Something involving complex and perhaps unknown principles of an alien technology. Something appropriate to the strange metal craft that traveled so very fast. Or perhaps a paradox. A thing that could not be constructed without exploding, like a lattice of U# of exactly critical size. Or an .instrument that must be assembled in an impossible sequence, like a clock with a complete, single-pieced outer shell. Or a part of a thing that could be "corrected" only if the whole thing were visualized, constructed, and tested. No, the blueprint he held now involved an awareness that must prove beyond mere technology, or at least Terran technology. Maybe it involved an awareness that transcended Terran philosophy as well. Harrison slapped the pencil down on his desk, rose, put his coat on, and left the office. "... we are guilty as the angels of the bible were guilty. Pride! That's it, folks, pride. False pride..." Harrison fringed the intent crowd of people cursing when, frequently, someone carelessly bumped into him in an effort to get nearer the sidewalk preacher. "We tried to live with the angels above. We wanted to fly like the birds. And then we wanted to fly like the angels... Someone near Harrison muttered an "Amen". Harrison wove his way through them wondering where the hundreds of such evangelists had come from so suddenly. "Ya know, folks, the angels themselves got uppity once. They wanted to be like Gawd himself, they did. Now, it's us." There was a small flutter of laughter among the crowd. It was very quickly suppressed -- so quickly that Harrison gained a new appreciation of the tenor of the crowd. "That's right, laugh! Laugh at our folly!" continued the thinfaced, bright-eyed man. "It was a sword that the angel used to kick Adam and Eve out of the garden. The sword figures all through the bible, folks. You ought to read the bible. You ought to get to know it. It's all there. All there for you to read..." By Christ , thought Harrison. Here was an aspect of the concept, sword, he had not considered. Morphological thinking required that all aspects of a concept be explored, all plotted against all others for possible correlation... No. That was silly. The bible was a beautiful piece of literature and some people believed it inspired. But the great good men who wrote the bible had little scientific knowledge of a sword. They would simply describe the weapon as a modern fiction writer would describe a blaster -- without knowing any more about one than that it existed and was a weapon. could be trusted to know his swords. "Go on home," Mills pleaded. "You're shot and you know it. You said yourself this isn't our show." "You go home. Bob. I'm all right." "George... you're acting strange. Strange as hell." "I'm all right. Leave me alone," snapped Harrison becoming irritable. Mills watched silently as the haggard man slipped a tablet into his mouth. "It's all right, Bob," smiled Harrison weakly. "I know how to use Benzedrine." "You damn fool, you'll wreck yourself... But the engineer ignored him. He continued paging his way through the book -- the bible, no less. George Harrison and the bible! Mills was awakened by the telephone. Reaching in the dark for it he answered almost without reaching consciousness. It was Harrison. "Bob, listen to me. If an angel were to look at us right now, what would he think?" "For God's sake!" Mills cried into the instrument. "What's up? You still at the office?" "Yeah, answer the question." "Hold on, George. I'll be down and get you. What you been drinking?" "Bob, would he -- she -- think much of us? Would the angel figure we were..." "How the hell would I know?" "No, Bob, what you should have asked is 'how the hell would he know.' " In a daze Mills heard the click as the other hung up. "Mr. Harrison, your assistant is looking for you." "Yes, I know, Kirk. But will you do it?" "Mr. Harrison, we only got one of them. If we screw it up it'll take time to make another and today's the day, you know." "I'll take the blame." "Mr. Harrison, you look kind of funny. Hadn't I better..." Harrison was sketching a drawing on a piece of waste paper. He was working in quick rough strokes, copying something from a book. "They'll blame us both, Mr. Harrison. Anyway, it might hold up somebody who's got a real idea..." "# have a real idea, Kirk. I'm going to draw it for you." The metal worker noticed that the book Harrison was copying from was a dictionary, a very old and battered one. "Here, can you follow what I've drawn?" The metal worker accepted it reluctantly, giving Harrison an odd, almost patronizing look. "This is crazy." "Kirk!" "Look, Mr. Harrison. We worked a long time together. You..." Harrison suddenly rose from the chair. "This is our one chance of beating this thing, no matter how crazy it seems. Will you do the job?" "You believe you got something, eh," the other said. "You think you have?" "I have to have." "Gentlemen," said the President of the Intersolar Council. "There is very little to say. There can be no denying the fact that we have exhausted our efforts at finding a satisfactory solution. "The contents of this book of reports represents the greatest concentration of expert reasoning perhaps ever applied to a single problem. "But alas, the problem remains -- unsolved." He paused to glance at his wristwatch. "The aliens return in an hour. As you very well know there is one action that remains for us. It is one we have held to this hour. It is one that has always been present and one that we have been constantly urged to use. "Force, gentlemen. It is not insignificant. It lies at our command. It represents the technology of the Intersolar alliance. I will entertain a motion to use it." There were no nay votes. ule. The ship grew from a tiny bright speck in the sky to full size. It settled to a graceful landing as before on the strip and silently moved into the revetment. Again it spoke in the voice of the frog, but the tone was, if anything, less human this time. "Earthmen, we have come for your solution." At that instant a hundred gun crews stiffened and waited for a signal behind their carefully camouflaged blast plates and inside dummy buildings... Harrison was running. The Administration building was empty. His footsteps echoed through the long, silent halls. He headed for an emergency exit that led directly to the blast tunnel. All doors were locked. The only way was over the wall. He paused and tossed the awkward, heavy object over the ten-foot wall. Then, backing toward the building, he ran and jumped for a hold onto the wall's edge. He failed by several inches to reach it. "Earthmen, we have come for your solution." He ran at the wall once more. This time he caught a fair hold with one hand. Digging at the rough concrete with his feet he was able to secure the hold and begin pulling his body upward. Quickly he was over the wall and onto the apron, a hundred yards from the shining metal ship. "Wait!" he shouted. "Wait, for God's sake!" Picking up the object he had tossed over the wall, he raised it above his head and ran toward the alien ship. "Wait! Here is the solution," he gasped. Somehow the command to fire was not given. There was a long moment of complete silence on the field. Nothing moved. Then the voice of the frog boomed from the alien ship. "The solution appears to be correct." The alien left three days later. Regular communications would begin within the week. Future meetings would work out technical difficulties. Preliminary trade agreements, adequately safe, guarded, were drafted and transmitted to the ship. The Races of Man and the Races of Wan were in harmony. "It was simply too obvious for any of us to notice," explained Harrison. "It took that street-comer evangelist to jar something loose -- even then it was an accident." "And the rest of us -- " started Mills. "While all of us worked on the assumption that the test involved a showing of strength -- a flexing of technological muscle." "I still don't see -- "  "Well, the evangelist put the problem on the right basis. He humbled us, exalted the aliens -- that is, he thought the alien was somehow a messenger from God to put us in our places." "We were pretty humble ourselves, especially the last day," protested Mills. "But humble about our technology" put in Harrison. "The aliens must be plenty far beyond us technologically. But how about their cultural superiority. Ask yourself how. a culture that could produce the ship we've just seen could survive without -- well destroying itself." "I still don't understand." "The aliens developed pretty much equally in all directions. They developed force -- plenty of it, enough force to kick that big ship through space at the speed of light plus. They must also have learned to control force, to live with it." "Maybe you better stick to the sword business," said Mills. "The sword is the crux of the matter. What did the alien say about the sword? 'It is defective.' It is defective, Bob. Not as an instrument of death. It will kill a man or injure him well enough. "But a sword -- or any other instrument of force for that matter -- is a terribly ineffectual tool. It was originally designed to act as a tool of social control. Did it -- or any subsequent weapon of force -- do a good job at that? "As long as man used swords, or gunpowder, or atom bombs, or hydrogen bombs, he was doomed to a fearful anarchy of unsolved problems and dreadful immaturity. "No, the sword is not useful. To fix it -- to 'correct that which renders it not useful' -- meant to make it something else. Now what in the hell did that mean? What can you do with a sword?" "You mean besides cut a man in two with it," said Mills. "Yes, what can you do with it besides use it as a weapon? Here our street-corner friend referred me to the right place: The bible! " They shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. "The aliens just wanted to know if we meant what we said." "Do we?" "We better. It's going to take a hell of a lot more than a silly ploughshare to convince those babies on that ship. But there's more to it than that. The ability of a culture finally to pound all of its swords -- its intellectual ones as well as its steel ones -- into ploughshares must be some kind of least common denominator for cultures that are headed for the stars." Beneath the stagnant water shadowed by water rotifers -- but it was their world, and they resented intrusion. the rotifers By Robert Abernathy Illustrated by Virgil Finlay H enry Chatham knelt by the brink of his garden pond, a glass fish bowl cupped in his thin, nervous hands. Carefully he dipped the bowl into the green-scummed water and, moving it gently, let trailing streamers of submerged water weeds drift into it. Then he picked up the old scissors he had laid on the bank, and clipped the stems of the floating plants, getting as much of them as he could in the container. When he righted the bowl and got stiffly to his feet, it contained, he thought hopefully, a fair cross-section of fresh-water plankton. He was pleased with himself for remembering that term from the book he had studied assiduously for the last few nights in order to be able to rope with Harry's inevitable  I I I  : ions. I here was even a shiny black water beetle doing insane circles on the surface of the water in the fish bowl. At sight of the insect, the eyes of the twelve-year-old boy, who had been standing by in silent expectation, widened with interest. "What's that thing, Dad?" he asked excitedly. "What's that crazy bug?" "I don't know its scientific name, I'm afraid," said Henry Chatham. "But when I was a boy we used to call them whirligig beetles." "He doesn't seem to think he has enough room in the bowl," said Harry thoughtfully. "Maybe we better put him back in the pond. Dad." "I thought you might want to look at him through the microscope," the father said in some surprise. "I think we ought to put him back," insisted Harry. Mr. Chatham held the dripping bowl obligingly. Harry's hand, a thin boy's hand with narrow sensitive fingers, hovered over the water, and when the beetle paused for a moment in its gyrations, made a dive for it. But the whirligig beetle, saw the hand coming, and, quicker than a wink, plunged under the water and scooted rapidly to the very bottom of the bowl. Harry's young face was rueful; he wiped his wet hand on his trousers. "I guess he wants to stay," he supposed. The two went up the garden path together and into the house, Mr. Chatham bearing the fish bowl before him like a votive offering. Harry's mother met them at the door, brandishing an old towel. "Here," she said firmly, "you wipe that thing off before you bring it in the house. And don't drip any of that dirty pond water on my good carpet." "It's not dirty," said Henry Chatham. "It's just full of life, plants and animals too small for the eye to see. But Harry's going to see them with his microscope." He accepted the towel and wiped the water and slime from the outside of the bowl; then, in the living-room, he set it beside an open window, where the life-giving summer sun slanted in and fell on the green plants. stood nearby, in a good light. It was an expensive microscope, no toy for a child, and it magnified four hundred diameters. Henry Chatham had bought it because he believed that his only son showed a desire to peer into the mysteries of smallness, and so far Harry had not disappointed him; he had been ecstatic over the instrument. Together they had compared hairs from their two heads, had seen the point of a fine sewing needle made to look like the tip of a crowbar by the lowest power of the microscope, had made grains of salt look like discarded chunks of glass brick, had captured a house-fly and marvelled at its clawed hairy feet, its great red faceted eyes, and the delicate veining and fringing of its wings. Harry was staring at the bowl of pond water in a sort of fascination. "Are there germs in the water, Dad? Mother says pond water is full of germs." "I suppose so," answered Mr. Chatham, somewhat embarrassed. The book on microscopic freshwater fauna had been explicit about Paramecium, and Euglena, diatomes and rhizopods, but it had failed to mention anything so vulgar as germs. But he supposed that which the book called Protozoa, the one-celled animalcules, were the same as germs. He said, "To look at things in water like this, you want to use a well-slide. It tells how to fix one in the instruction book." He let Harry find the glass slide with a cup ground into it, and another smooth slip of glass to cover it. Then he half-showed, half-told him how to scrape gently along the bottom sides of the drifting leaves, to capture the teeming life that dwelt there in the slime. When the boy understood, his young hands were quickly more skillful than his father's; they filled the well with a few drops of water that was promisingly green and murky. Already Harry knew how to adjust the lighting mirror under the stage of the microscope and turn th# focusing screws. He did so, bent intently over the eyepiece, squinting down the polished barrel in the happy expectation of wonders. Henry Chatham's eyes wandered to the fish bowl, where the whirligig beetle had come to the top again and was describing intricate patterns among the water plants. He looked back to his son, and saw that Harry had ceased to turn the screws and instead was just looking -- looking with a rapt, delicious fixity. His hands lay loosely clenched on the table top, and he hardly seemed to breathe. Only once or twice his lips moved as if to shape an exclamation that was snatched away by some new vision. "Have you got it, Harry?" asked his father after two or three minutes during which the boy did not move. Harry took a last long look, then glanced up, blinking slightly. "You look, Dad!" he exclaimed warmly. "It's -- it's like a garden in the water, full of funny little people!" Mr. Chatham, not reluctantly, bent to gaze into the eyepiece. This was new to him too, and instantly he saw the aptness of Harry's simile. There was a garden there, of weird, green, transparent stalks composed of plainly visible cells fastened end to end, with globules and bladders like fruits or seed-pods attached to them, floating among them; and in the garden the strange little people swam to and fro, or clung with odd appendages to the stalks and branches. Their bodies were transparent like the plants, and in them were pulsing hearts and other organs plainly visible. They looked a little like sea horses with pointed tails, but their heads were different, small and rounded, with big, dark, glistening eyes. All at once Mr. Chatham realized that Harry was speaking to him, still in high excitement. "What are they, Dad?" he begged to know. His father straightened up and shook his head puzzledly. "I don't know, Harry," he answered slowly, casting about in his memory. He seemed to remember a microphotograph of a creature like those in the hook he had studied, but the name that had gone with it eluded him. He had worked as an accountant for so many years that his memory was all for figures now. He bent over once more to immerse his eyes and mind in the green water-garden on the slide. The little creatures swam to and fro as before, growing hazy and dwindling or swelling as they swam out of the narrow focus of the lens; he gazed at those who paused in sharp definition, and saw that, although he had at first seen no visible means of propulsion, each creature bore about its head a halo of thread-like, flickering cilia that lashed the water and drew it forward, for all the world like an airplane propeller or a rapidly turning wheel. "I know what they are!" exclaimed Henry Chatham, turning to his son with an almost boyish excitement. "They're rotifers! That means 'wheel-bearers', and they were called that because to the first scientists who saw them it looked like they swam with wheels." Harry had got down the book and was leafing through the pages. He looked up seriously. "Here they are," he said. "Here's a picture that looks almost like the ones in our pond water." "Let's see," said his father. They looked at the pictures and descriptions of the Rotifera; there was a good deal of concrete information on the habits and physiology of these odd and complex little animals who live their swarming lives in the shallow, stagnant waters of the Earth. It said that they were much more highly organized than Protozoa, having a discernible heart, brain, digestive system, and nervous system, and that their reproduction was by means of two sexes like that of the higher orders. Beyond that, they were a mystery; their relationship to other lifeforms remained shrouded in doubt. "You've got something interesting there," said' Henry Chatham with satisfaction. "Maybe you'll find out something about them that nobody knows yet." He was pleased when Harry spent all the rest of that Sunday afternoon peering into the microscope, watching the rotifers, and even more pleased when the boy found a pencil and paper and tried, in an amateurish way, to draw and describe what he saw in the green water-garden. Beyond a doubt, Henry thought, here was a hobby that had captured Harry as nothing else ever had. pleased. When her husband laid down his evening paper and went into the kitchen for a drink of water, she cornered him and hissed at him: "I told you you had no business buying Harry a thing like that! If he keeps on at this rate, he'll wear his eyes out in no time." Henry Chatham set down his water glass and looked straight at his wife. "Sally, Harry's eyes are young and he's using them to learn with. You've never been much worried over me, using my eyes up eight hours a day, five days a week, over a blind-alley bookkeeping job." He left her angrily silent and went back to his paper. He would lower the paper every now and then to watch Harry, in his corner of the living-room, bowed obliviously over the microscope and the secret life of the rotifers. Once the boy glanced up from his periodic drawing and asked, with the air of one who proposes a pondered question: "Dad, if you look through a microscope the wrong way is it a telescope?" Mr. Chatham lowered his paper and bit his underlip. "I don't think so -- no, I don't know. When you look through a microscope, it makes things seem closer -- one way, that is ; if you looked the other way, it would probably make them seem farther off. What did you want to know for?" "Oh -- nothing," Harry turned back to his work. As if on afterthought, he explained, "I was wondering if the rotifers could see me when I'm looking at them." Mr. Chatham laughed, a little nervously, because the strange fancies which his son sometimes voiced upset his ordered mind. Remembering the dark glistening eyes of the rotifers he had seen, however, he could recognize whence this question had stemmed. At dusk, Harry insisted on setting up the substage lamp which had been bought with the microscope, and by whose light he could go on looking until his bedtime, when his father helped him arrange a wick to feed the little glass-covered well in the slide so it would not dry up before morning. It was mother's strenuous complaints, that the boy went to bed at ten o'clock. In the following days his interest became more and more intense. He spent long hours, almost without moving, watching the rotifers. For the little animals had become the sole object which he desired to study under the microscope, and even his father found it difficult to understand such an enthusiasm. During the long hours at the office to which he commuted, Henry Chatham often found the vision of his son, absorbed with the invisible world that the microscope had opened to him, coming between him and the columns in the ledgers. And sometimes, too, he envisioned the dim green water-garden where the little things swam to and fro, and a strangeness filled his thoughts. On Wednesday evening, he glanced at tire fish bowl and noticed that the water beetle, the whirligig beetle, was missing. Casually, he asked his son about it. "I had to get rid of him," said the boy with a trace of uneasiness in his manner. "I took him out and squashed him." "Why did you have to do that?" "He was eating the rotifers and their eggs," said Harry, with what seemd to be a touch of remembered anger at the beetle. He glanced toward his work-table, where three or four well-slides with small green pools under their glass covers now rested in addition to the one that was under the microscope. "How did you find out he was eating them?" inquired Mr. Chatham, feeling a warmth of pride at the thought that Harry had discovered such a scientific fact for himself. The boy hesitated oddly. "I -- I looked it up in the book," he answered. His father masked his faint disappointment. "That'S fine," he said. "I guess you find out more about them all the time." "Uh-huh," admitted Harry, turning back to his table. There was undoubtedly something a little strange about Harry's manner; and now Mr. Chatham realized that it had been two days since Harry had asked him to "Quick, take a look!" at the newest wonder he had discovered. With this thought teasing at his mind, the father walked casually over to the table where his son sat hunched and, looking down at the litter of slides and papers -- some of which were covered with figures and scribblings of which he could make nothing. He said diffidently, "How about a look?" Harry glanced up as if startled. He was silent a moment; then he slid reluctantly from his chair and said, "All right." Mr. Chatham sat down and bent over the microscope. Puzzled and a little hurt, he twirled the focusing vernier and peered into the eyepiece, looking down once more into the green water world of the rotifers. under the lens, and they swam lazily to and fro, their cilia beating like miniature propellers. Their dark eyes stared, wet and glistening; they drifted in the motionless water, and clung with sucker-like pseudo-feet to the tangled plant stems. Then, as he almost looked away, one of them detached itself from the group and swam upward, toward him, growing larger and blurring as it rose out of the focus of the microscope. The last thing that remained defined, before it became a shapeless gray blob and vanished, was the dark blotches of the great cold eyes, seeming to stare full at him -- cold, motionless, but alive. It was a curious experience. Henry Chatham drew suddenly back from the eyepiece, with an involuntary shudder that he could not explain to himself. He said haltingly, "They look interesting." "Sure, Dad," said Harry. He moved to occupy the chair again, and his dark young head bowed once more over the microscope. His father walked back across the room and sank gratefully into his armchair -- after all, it had been a hard day at the office. He watched Harry work the focusing screws as if trying to find something, then take his pencil and begin to write quickly and impatiently. It was with a guilty feeling of prying that, after Harry had been sent reluctantly to bed, Henry Chatham took a tentative look at those papers which lay in apparent disorder on his son's work table. He frowned uncomprehendingly at the things that were written there; it was neither mathematics nor language, but many of the scribblings were jumbles of letters and figures. It looked like code, and he remembered that less than a year ago, Harry had been passionately interested in cryptography, and had shown what his father, at least, believed to be a considerable aptitude for such things... But what did cryptography have to do with microscopy, or codes with -- rotifers? Nowhere did there seem to be a key, but there were occasional words and phrases jotted into the margins of some of the sheets. Mr. Chatham read these, and learned nothing. "Can't dry up, but they can," said one. "Beds of germs," said another. And in the corner of one sheet, "I -- Yes. # -- No." The only thing that looked like a translation was the note: "rty#pr is the pond." Mr. Chatham shook his head bewilderedly, replacing the sheets carefully as they had been. Why should Harry want to keep notes on his scientific hobby in code? he wondered, rationalizing even as he wondered. He went to bed still puzzling, but it did not keep him from sleeping, for he was tired. Then, only the next evening, his wife maneuvered to get him alone with her and burst out passionately: "Henry, I told you that microscope was going to ruin Harry's eyesight ! I was watching him today when he didn't know I was watching him, and I saw him winking and blinking right while he kept on looking into the thing. I was minded to stop him then and there, but I want you to assert your authority with him and tell him he can't go on." Henry Chatham passed one nervous hand over his own aching eyes. He asked mildly, "Are you sure it wasn't just your imagination, Sally? After all, a person blinks quite normally, you know." "It was not my imagination!" snapped Mrs. Chatham. "I know the symptoms of eyestrain when I see them, I guess. You'll have to stop Harry using that thing so much, or else be prepared to buy him glasses." "All right, Sally," said Mr. Chatham wearily. "I'll see if I can't persuade him to be a little more moderate." He went slowly into the livingroom. At the moment, Harry was not using the microscope; instead, he seemed to be studying one of his cryptic pages of notes. As his father entered, he looked up sharply and swiftly laid the sheet down -- face down. Perhaps it wasn't all Sally's imagination; the boy did look nervous, and there was a drawn, white look to his thin young face. His father said gently, "Harry, Mother tells me she saw you blinking, as if your eyes were tired, when you were looking into the microscope today. You know if you look too much, it can be a strain on your sight." Harry nodded quickly, too quickly, perhaps. "Yes, Dad," he said. "I read that in the book. It says there that if you close the eye you're looking with for a little while, it rests you and your eyes don't get tired. So I was practising that this afternoon. Mother must have been watching me then, and got the wrong idea." "Oh," said Henry Chatham. "Well, it's good that you're trying to be careful. But you've got your mother worried, and that's not so good. I wish, myself, that you wouldn't spend all your time with the microscope. Don't you ever play baseball with the fellows any more?" "I haven't got time," said the boy, with a curious stubborn twist to his mouth. "I can't right now, Dad." He glanced toward the microscope. "Your rotifers won't die if you leave them alone for a while. And if they do, there'll always be a new crop." "But I'd lose track of them," said Harry strangely. "Their lives are so short -- they live so awfully fast. You don't know how fast they live." "I've seen them," answered his father. "I guess they're fast, all right." He did not know quite what to make of it all, so he settled himself in his chair with his paper. But that night, after Harry had gone later than usual to bed, he stirred himself to take down the book that dealt with life in pondwater. There was a memory pricking at his mind; the memory of the water beetle, which Harry had killed because, he said, he was eating the rotifers and their eggs. And the boy had said he had found that fact in the book. Mr. Chatham turned through the book; he read, with aching eyes, all that it said about rotifers. He searched for information on the beetle, and found there was a whole family of whirligig beetles. There was some material here on the characteristics and habits of the Gyrinidae, but nowhere did it mention the devouring of rotifers or their eggs among their customs. He tried the topical index, but there was no help there. Harry' must have lied, thought his father with a whirling head. But why, why in God's name should he say he'd looked a thing up in the book when he must have found it out for himself, the hard way? There was no sense in it. He went back to the book, convinced that, sleepy as he was, he must have missed a point. The information simply wasn't there. He got to his feet and crossed the room to Harry's work table; he switched on the light over it and stood looking down at the pages of mystic notations. There were more pages now, quite a few. But none of them seemed to mean anything. The earlier pictures of rotifers which Harry had drawn had given way entirely to mysterious figures. Then the simple explanation occurred to him, and he switched off the light with a deep feeling of relief. Harry hadn't really known that the water beetle ate rotifers; he had just suspected it. And, with his boy's respect for fair play, he had hesitated to admit that he had executed the beetle merely on suspicion. That didn't take the lie away, but it removed the mystery at least. H enry Chatham slept badly that night and dreamed distorted dreams. But when the alarm clock shrilled in the gray of morning, jarring him awake, the dream in which he had been immersed skittered away to the back of his mind, out of knowing, and sat there leering at him with strange, dark, glistening eyes. He dressed, washed the flat morning taste out of his mouth with coffee, and took his way to his train and the ten-minute ride into the city. On the way there, instead of snatching a look at the morning paper, he sat still in his seat, head bowed, trying to recapture the dream whose vanishing made him uneasy. He was superstitious about dreams in an up-to-date way, believing them not warnings from some Beyond outside himself, but from a subsconscious more knowing than the waking conscious mind. During the morning his work went slowly, for he ket pausing, sometimes in the midst of totalling a column of figures, to grasp at some mocking half-memory of that dream. At last, elbows on his desk, staring unseeingly at the clock on the wall, in the midst of the subdued murmur of the office, his mind went back to Harry, dark head bowed motionless over the barrel of his microscope, looking, always looking into the pale green watergardens and the unseen lives of the beings that... All at once it came to him, the dream he had dreamed. He had been bending over the microscope, he had been looking into the unseen world, and the horror of what he had seen gripped him now and brought out the chill sweat on his body. For he had seen his son there in the clouded water, among the twisted glassy plants, his face turned upward and eyes wide in the agonized appeal of the drowning; and bubbles rising, fading. But abound him had been a swarm of the weird creatures, and they had been dragging him down, down, blurring out of focus, and their great dark eyes glistening wetly, coldly... He was sitting rigid at his desk, his work forgotten; all at once he saw the clock and noticed with a start that it was already eleven a.m. A fear he could not define seized on him, and his hand reached spasmodically for the telephone on his desk. But before he touched it, it began ringing. After a moment's paralysis, he picked up the receiver. It was his wife's voice that came shrilly over the wires. "Henry!" she cried. "Is that you?" "Hello, Sally," he said with stiff lips. Her voice as she answered seemed to come nearer and go farther away, and he realized that his hand holding the instrument was shaking. "Henry, you've got to come home right now. Harry's sick. He's got a high fever, and he's been asking for you." He moistened his lips and said, "I'll be right home. I'll take a taxi." "Hurry!" she exclaimed. "He's been saying queer things. I think he's delirious." She paused, and added, "And it's all the fault of that microscope you bought him!" "I'll be right home," he repeated dully. to meet him; she must be upstairs, in Harry's bedroom. He paused in the living room and glanced toward the table that bore the microscope; the black, gleaming thing still stood there, but he did not see any of the slides, and the papers were piled neatly together to one side. His eyes fell on the fish bowl; it was empty, clean and shining. Fie knew Harry hadn't done those things; that was Sally's neatness. Abruptly, instead of going straight up the stairs, he moved to the table and looked down at the pile of papers. The one on top was almost blank; on it was written several times: rty#pr... rty#pr... His memory for figure combinations served him; he remembered what had been written on another page : "rty#pr is the pond." That made him think of the pond, lying quiescent under its green scum and trailing plants at the end of the garden. A step on the stair jerked him around. It was his wife, of course. She said in a voice sharp-edged with apprehension: "What are you doing down here? Harry wants you. The doctor hasn't come; I phoned him just before I called you, but he hasn't come." He did not answer. Instead he gestured at the pile of papers, the empty fish bowl, an imperative question in his face. "I threw that dirty water back in the pond. It's probably what he caught something from. And he was breaking himself down, humping over that thing. It's your fault, for getting it for him. Are you coming?" She glared coldly at him, turning back to the stairway. "I'm coming," he said heavily, and followed her upstairs. Harry lay back in his bed, a low mound under the covers. His head was propped against a single pillow, and his eyes were half-closed, the lids swollen-looking, his face hotly flushed. He was breathing slowly as if asleep. But as his father entered the room, he opened his eyes as if with an effort, fixed them on him, said, "Dad... I've got to tell you." Mr. Chatham took the chair by the bedside, quietly, leaving his wife to stand. He asked, "About what, Harry?" "About -- things." The boy's eyes shifted to his mother, at the foot of his bed. "I don't want to talk to her. She thinks it's just fever. But you'll understand." Henry Chatham lifted his gaze to meet his wife's. "Maybe you'd better go downstairs and wait for the doctor, Sally." She looked hard at him, then turned abruptly to go out. "All right," she said in a thin voice, and closed the door softly behind her. "Now what did you want to tell me, Harry?" "About them... the rotifers," the boy said. His eyes had drifted half-shut again but his voice was clear. "They did it to me... on purpose." "Did what?" "I don't know... They used one of their cultures. They've got all kinds: beds of germs, under the leaves in the water. They've been growing new kinds, that will be worse than anything that ever was before... They live so fast, they work so fast." Henry Chatham was silent, leaning forward beside the bed. "It was only a little while, before I found out they knew about me. I could see them through my microscope, but they could see me too... And they kept signaling, swimming and turning... I won't tell you how to talk to them, because nobody ought to talk to them ever again. Because they find out more than they tell... They know about us, now, and they hate us. They never knew before -- that there was anybody but them... So they want to kill us all." "But why should they want to do that?" asked the father, as gently as he could. He kept telling himself, "He's delirious. It's like Sally says, he's been wearing himself out, thinking too much about -- the rotifers. But the doctor will be here pretty soon, the doctor will know what to do." "They don't like knowing that they aren't the only ones on Earth that can think. I expect people would be the same way." "But they're such little things, Harry. They can't hurt us at all." The boy's eyes opened wide, shadowed with terror and fever. "I told you, Dad -- They're growing new ones... And they kept telling me to take them back to the pond, so they could tell all the rest, and they could all start getting ready -- for war." He remembered the shapes that swam and crept in the green water gardens, with whirling cilia and great, cold, glistening eyes. And he remembered the clean, empty fish bowl in the window downstairs. "Don't let them. Dad," said Harry convulsively. "You've got to kill them all. The ones here and the ones in the pond. You've got to kill them good -- because they don't mind being killed, and they lay lots of eggs, and their eggs can stand almost anything, even drying up. And the eggs remember what the old ones knew." "Don't worry," said Henry Chatham quickly. He grasped his son's hand, a hot limp hand that had slipped from under the coverlet. "We'll stop them. We'll drain the pond." "That's swell," whispered the boy, his energy fading again. "I ought to have told you before, Dad -- but first I was afraid you'd laugh, and then -- I was just... afraid..." His voice drifted away. And his father, looking down at the flushed face, saw that he seemed asleep. Well, that was better than the sick delirium -- saying such strange, wild things -- Downstairs the doctor was saying harshly, "All right. All right. But let's have a look at the patient." Henry Chatham came quietly downstairs; he greeted the doctor briefly, and did not follow him to Harry's bedroom. When he was left alone in the room, he went to the window and stood looking down at the microscope. He could not rid his head of strangeness: A window between two worlds, our world and that of the infinitely small, a window that looks both ways. After a time, he went through the kitchen and let himself out the back door, into the noonday sunlight. He followed the garden path, between the weed-grown beds of vegetables, until he came to the edge of the little pond. It lay there quiet in the sunlight, green-scummed and walled with stiff rank grass, a lone dragonfly swooping and wheeling above it. The image of all the stagnant waters, the fertile breedingplaces of strange life, with which it was joined in the end by the tortuous hidden channels, the oozing pores of the Earth. And it seemed to him then that he glimpsed something, a hitherto unseen miasma, rising above the pool and darkening the sunlight ever so little. A dream, a shadow -- the shadow of the alien dream of things hidden in smallness, the dark dream of the rotifers. The dragonfly, having seized a bright-winged fly that was sporting over the pond, descended heavily through the sunlit air and came to rest on a broad lily pad. Henry Chatham was suddenly afraid. He turned and walked slowly, wearily, up the path toward the house. Personalities in Science he was a man of diversified talents The Persecuted almost equal to those of the great Leonardo da Vinci. His family had a starring role whenever the overtaken his parents; and like unstory of the discovery of the law of told thousands of such parents they gravity is told; yet there is another wanted their son to have a good, object which deserves a place in the solid education as a doctor in order annals of history that is equal to to insure his future. The one big that now famous apple. There's a worry that they had was that this splendid bronze lamp which hangs son of theirs, who showed such today, as it did in the #th century, great mechanical aptitude at an from the roof of the cathedral in early a g e  would become interested Pisa. The slightest motion will make in mathematics and so be drawn this lamp sway. This object was to away from the security of the career Galileo what the apple was to Newthey had chosen for him. The fear ton. Putting the index finger of one was obviously a well-founded one. hand on the wrist of the other and, Besides his skill in mechanics, using this natural clock, Galileo Galileo was far above average in found that always, whether the such arts as sculpture and music, lamp was describing large arcs or He painted with such skill and small ones, each swing or vibration imagination that he defied his partook exactly the same time as any ents, as so many of us do, and chose other. This seemingly simple discovan artist's career for himself. When ery was the cornerstone of the scihe entered the University of Padua ence of motion. It was the humble to begin his studies, he realized that beginning which served as the inin order to be a really good artist he spiration for such men as John would have to study geometry. Now Keppler, who gave us the laws of a whole new field was opened beplanetary motion, and for Newton's fore him. laws of gravity and motion. He was able to solve the most difSomehow, in the minds of most ficult problems with ease, and he down through the centuries vaguetions of others which had stood as examples of greatness for hundreds of years. Naturally there was no more talk about being either a doctor or an artist; he had found the mistress who was to hold him until the end of his days. Galileo found his work bound by laws and systems which had stood as irrefutable evidences of truth for almost two thousand years. When he rebelled against accepting these laws as gospel, he proved his contentions with experiments and facts so salient that he could scarcely be doubted. He climbed to the top of the leaning tower of Pisa to refute Aristotle. He invented a telescope to refute Ptolemy. A ristotle had taught that when two bodies, of the same substance but differing weights, were dropped from an equal height, the heavier body would reach the earth first. Believe it or not, no one had questioned this statement for I ,# years ! When Galileo had satisfied himself that the theory was all wrong he set out to prove his point. He used the now famous Leaning Tower as a proving ground. He dropped two shots of different weights from the top of the tower, and when they reached the ground at the same time he felt that he had definitely been vindicated. But all this step toward the real truth earned him was enmity. From all over the then civilized w'orld professors and students rose in a body against him. Aristotle had said that the objects would not reach the earth at the same time -- it said so right in his books. Progress such as this w'as too fast for the times and Galileo w'as hounded from the scene of his victory and forced to seek refuge in Florence. Now his lot was miserable. He had his Mother, a brother, and tw'o sisters depending on him for support; and for a radical such as he was there wasn't much of anything like money coming his way. He tutored pupils to help stretch his meager earnings, and as he taught them he continued to learn himself. He had never disputed Ptolemy's laws -- those that stated that the vaults of heaven revolved about the Earth -- because he'd believed it himself. But now he began to believe that Copernicus had been right. Although he knew that to teach these theories was dangerous heresy, he began to teach that the Earth revolved about the sun, as did all the other known planets of the time. To prove his theory he invented a far better telescope than had ever before been made. With this new telescope he saw for the first time that the moon was not round and flat and smooth as both Aristotle and Ptolemy had said; but that it had mountains and hollow's like the Earth. He was the first to see the rings of Saturn, and found that there were lesser planets revolving around Jupiter just as other planets revolve around the sun. He proposed the theory of an unlimited universe, too, and one noble critic tried to crush him by saying : "There are only seven openings in the head -- two ears, two eyes, tw'o nostrils, and one mouth, there are only seven metals, and only seven days of the week, therefore there can be only seven planets." When Galileo made the unbelievers look through the telescope, and the scoffers saw exactly what he had told them they would see in the heavens, they cried, "Oh, well, they aren't visible to the naked eye, and so they cannot influence the Earth; and being useless, they do not exist." When our stargazer went on to announce that not only did the Earth revolve around the sun, but that the sun also revolved; the Church stepped in. An investigating commission was established to study the teachings of Copernicus. They called in Galileo and warned him that this was pure heresy which he was teaching; they ordered him to return to the teaching of Ptolemy's nine-hundred year old theory that the vaults of heaven revolved around the Earth. If he refused he was warned that he would have to take the consequences ; which in those days consisted of burning at the stake, or being crushed to death in an iron maiden. these consequences for the next # years, which he spent in study and in strengthening his theories even more. In # he could no longer contain himself under this thought control and wrote a book defending Copernicus. The inquisition pounced, and for his disobedience he was made to wear sackcloth and to kneel in ashes and required to swear that he would never say or believe again that the Earth revolved around the sun. He was told that should be refuse to swear this oath he would be condemned to torture and burning. The inquisition won, fear of torture drove Galileo to vow that he would do that which they required of him. He was carted off to prison, and though later released he spent the rest of his days with spies watching him to keep him on the path that the Church had said he must follow. He died at #, blind so that he could no longer see the wonders of the skies, and thoroughly crushed. But not before he had given the world a heritage of knowledge that man after man used as a foundation for the progress of the natural sciences. Galileo was so far ahead of his time that he had put forth the theory that there were no elements in the universe that differed from those on the Earth. The final establishment of this proof was made by Dr. Ira Bowen as recently as #! -- ew Space in its far dark reaches can be fickle with a man; it can shatter his dreams, fill him with fear and hate. It can also cure a man -- if he is strong enough. By Arthur G. Stangland Illustrated by Ed Valigursky of space. Twirling slowly in awesome majesty, the meteor scintillated like a massive black diamond. And with its onrush came a devastating sense of doom. He looked everywhere. To the front, to the side, and below -- there was no escape. Transfixed, he stared at the great rock flashing in the fire, of myriad suns as it -- Bill Staker, passenger rocket captain for Interplanetary Lines, came fully awake in his New York hotel room. For a minute, he lay unmoving on his bed, savoring the delicious sensation of weight. No queazy stirring in the pit of his belly for lack of gravity, no forced squinting because of muscular reorientation. With a muttered curse he unwound himself from his covers and sat up. For a moment he rested his head in his hands, thinking, only a nightmare, thank God, only a nightmare. He lifted his head, and found cold sweat on his hands. Then sighing in relief he swung his feet over the edge of his bed. A glance at the clock showed #:# p.m. Monday, June #th, #. Heavily, he clumped across the room in the peculiar flat-footed gait of a spaceman accustomed to magnetic contact shoes. Cigarette in hand he sank into a heavy chair, touched a button on the arm, then sat back to watch the telescreen. It was a rehash of the day's news. In nasal tones a senator was accusing the Republicrats of raising taxes. Then followed scenes from a spectacular fire. Suddenly, Bill's drooping eyelids popped open. A commentator was saying, "... the two rockets of the Staker The small meteor ripped through the Space Bird's crew compartment, blinding the radar scope and severing communication with Earth. Space Mining Company, ready for a scouting trip to the asteroid Beta Quadrant." A close-up of Tom Staker followed. Tall, rangy, with blond hair like straw in the wind. Bill laid his cigarette in a tray and with critical interest leaned forward to look at his brother. "We figure to find uranium," Tom was saying, with a glance toward the vertical rockets, "all through the Beta Quadrant. Our departure is waiting on the return of my brother, Bill, from his Marsto-Earth run." A reporter asked Tom, "Private enterprise is unique in these days of virtual monopolies. What's the story behind it?" "Well, our great-grandfather, George Staker, believed passionately in private enterprise," Tom began. "Somewhere around # or # he established a trust fund for his third generation descendants to finance any project they think worthwhile. And he got an ironclad guarantee from the government that the trust fund for private enterprise would be honored in the future. You see, my ancestor was quite a romanticist. In one of his books entitled 'The Philosophy of Science' he says 'People of this dawning Atomic Age little realize they are living in a vast dream. A dream that is slowly taking objective shape. A tool here, a part there, a plan on some drafting table. Men of ideas are pointing the way, structuring the inner dream world of a generation. Even today's science fiction literature contains important ideas for the dreams-become-reality of tomorrow.' " Tom finished up. "With our Project Venture, Bill and I are going to bring a dream into reality -- making a little on the side, of course!" The commentator ended his interview with: "And so, we await with great interest the carrying out of George Staker's dream, a man whose Twentieth Century ideas of private enterprise have blown a breath of fresh air into an age of dull dreams and little imagination." Bill Staker pressed the control button, darkening the screen. "Dream boy. Tom, you damned fool." He got up and scuffed into the bathroom to stare into the mirror. Twenty-five years old, and already lines were grooving both sides of his nostrils. Tousled black hair like brush hanging over a high bank, and ridged creases in his forehead. Little lumps of flesh bulging over the corners of his mouth from constant tension. The tension of outwitting space on each trip 'tween the planets. But worst of all was the look in his gray eyes. The look that never went away anymore. The look of a man who has spent too much time staring into the enigma of the Universe and -- thinking. "I'm scared -- scared as hell!" he blurted at his reflection. "And if I don't get hold of myself, I'm through -- washed up!" Space was no place for a man with imagination -- too much imagination. You stared into the empty blackness here, you stared into the inky blackness there, behind you the Earth a tiny pinpoint, the Earth that meant rock solid footing, the caress of wind and land in all directions. But out there in the aching void you raced for Mars like a mouse scuttling across a lighted floor. Raced because of what you couldn't see, couldn't fathom. Yet, you knew It was out there, staring back inscrutably. He rubbed the flat of his hand across his right cheek, sighing from emotional weariness. Then he scuffed back into the room. On the way he collected a bottle of bourbon, mixer and glass, and dropped into the big chair. As he worked on the bottle, all the anxiety and apprehension in him faded. Once he stared at the bottom of his empty glass. Funny how a guy could panic all of a sudden. He remembered it clearly now. Riding into town yesterday from the rocket port, he started brooding over details of Project Venture. Suddenly, an overwhelming black tide of fear worse than he had ever experienced confronted him. Like a man on the verge of insanity he licked his dry lips, staring about him and feeling as if something strange and terrible were taking possession of his mind. And in the middle of his spell a cloud blacker than space itself started reaching for him. That was when he yelled to the startled bus driver to let him out at this hotel. Maybe he could get hold of himself here. Now, his arms sprawled over the sides of the heavy chair, he drifted ofl into a snoring stupor. I N Till',, morning he awoke to a splitting headache. Somehow it helped to hold his head between both hands and swear at it in a running mutter. Finally he roused himself to go to the bathroom for a cold shower. Afterward, donning his powder blue Captain's uniform, he went down to breakfast. He dawdled over crisp bacon and eggs, glanced at morning editions, and all the while the ashes of last night's emotional holocaust drifted through him. Drifted in fitful vagrant thoughts. He should have said no that first day a year ago. The big law firm made a great to do over the old document from his ancestor. Unique, they said. The chance of a lifetime. And by the end of the first meeting Tom was all fired up. Mining atomic power metals in the asteroid belt would bring the biggest returns, he said. They would be the only ones allowed to compete with the Asteroid Mining Corporation monopoly. And now Tom was building up public excitement in the venture, as if it were a circus. The damned fool. Why had he let his brother talk him into -- Suddenly, his line of thought snapped, and he was acutely aware of staring eyes. He looked to his left, then felt a warm flush technicolor his cheeks. "Christy!" Her blond curls making a soft halo around her jauntily raked hat, the space hostess from his ship gave him a warm smile. She was adequately stacked, Bill reflected, but there was levelheaded firmness and resolution in her too. That was why she was hard to handle. "Good morning, Bill." He didn't like the accusing gleam in her eye but he was glad to see her. "Sit down, Christy. Have some coffee." He held her hands a moment, then eased her into the opposite chair. He tried disarming her with a show of great enthusiasm. But the way she settled herself into the seat, all the while regarding him with those clear penetrating blue eyes, told him she was going on no snipe hunt. "When you kissed me goodby at the port yesterday, Bill, you said you were going directly to the field to be with Tom." It wasn't a statement -- it was an accusation. With an elaborate show of casualness he shrugged his shoulders. "Well, I was fagged out from this last trip. Decided I'd do better getting a full night's rest by myself at a hotel." The waiter brought her coffee, and she left it to cool. She folded her long tapering fingers on the table, and a delicate lift to her fine brows gave her an expression of sympathetic concern. Her smile was regretfuL "Rocket men don't drink. Bill. You know it too. Bad for muscular coordination." He said in some surprise, "You mean it's that loud?" "Uh-huh." Christy leaned forward. "What is it, Bill? You haven't been yourself for weeks. You looked haggard yesterday and when you left the ship you were almost running, as if trying to escape from something. And now this strange avoidance of Tom. He got hold of me this morning early, wanting to know where you were. And I guess it's pretty important that he sees you, Bill. Seems there's been trouble at the field." It was as if someone had prodded him in an agonizingly sore place and he reacted instinctively. He let his knife clatter on his plate, aware that he was dramatizing himself. "When I'm ready for a woman's sticking her nose into my affairs. I'll send her a special invitation!" Christy's delicate nostrils flared, and her bosom rose and fell rapidly. Then she seemed to get hold of herself. "I'm sorry if you got that impression, Bill. I was only trying to help you both." i lierishing his irritation, Bill went on, "Seems to me you're bending over backward helping Tom. playing messenger, private eye -- " Christy broke in with a catch in her throat, "Oh, Bill, please! Let's not quarrel as soon as we get back." Bill shoved his dishes aside, the tone of her voice reaching into him to dampen down the fires of anger. Then he managed a slow faint grin. "Okay, Christy." He reached for the check, saying, "Well, if you can stand my company, would you like to come along out to the field?" With her eyes glistening, she answered, "I'd love to." field of the Staker Space Mining Company was an hour's drive north of the city. Three miles from the field they made out the two gleaming snouts of the rockets pointing skyward. Then as they approached the edge of the field, Bill turned off toward a two story frame structure that served as office and warehouse, Bill said, "Might as well check to see if Tom is in the office first." At the door Bill poked his head in and shouted up the stairwell, "Hi -- Tom?" A chair scraped, and footsteps sounded across the upstairs floor. "Yeah -- that you. Bill? C'mon up!" They found Tom at a desk before a wide window view of the field. On the office walls hung big graphs of fuel consumption curves, trajectory plots from Earth to the asteroid belt, ballistics computations, oxygen consumption curves per unit metabolism per man. ' Christy looking at the rockets, said, "Gee, Tom, they look beautiful. Like monsters straining their tethers." Tom looked up at the girl's profile, and to Bill who was watching, he bore the look of a man savoring what he saw. "Yes, they are. That first one's mine, the Space Bird. The other is Bill's, the Space Dragon Bill cast a professional eye over the charts and graphs on the wall, while far down in his subconscious a sharp twinge of jealousy fulminated, tangling with his fears of space in a hybrid monstrosity. Then like lava in a plugged volcano his obsession found a new outlet. The fear of space now came up disguised as hatred for Tom. In an unusually calm voice Bill said, "Well, I see you have everything just about completed." "Yeah," Tom glanced up with a significant look. "Someone else was interested in those charts and graphs too the other day. Someone who didn't bother to use the door." "What d'you mean -- somebody break in?" Tom nodded. "Yep. Jimmied a window downstairs. But I don't think they got anything, because the door to the office was still locked when the watchman surprised them. They got away in the dark." Christy's eyes grew large and round. "Who do you suppose it was?" Hitching his long body erect, Tom said with a gesture of his right hand, "Well, there's only one outfit interested in our destination -- and that's Asteroid Mining." "Good heavens," Christy said in great surprise. "You don't mean a big corporation like that would stoop so low?" Tom smiled at her. "With a monopoly on power metals Asteroid has been gouging the world. People have become resigned to the situation. But if we can supply uranium ore cheaper there's going to be a clamor for private enterprise again. Under the present system private enterprise has been withering on the vine. This is our big chance and the public is pulling for us." Bill's hold on his temper slipped another notch. "Yeah, I saw that interview with the television news you had. Saw it last night." He folded his arms across his chest. "If that's your conception of winning support for our venture then you better take up circus advertising." For a moment Tom looked like a man who's taken a bucket of ice water in the face. Then his feet hit the floor. "Say, now, wait a minute, Bill!" he said, half in anger. "Who d'you think's been shouldering the big share of Project Venture -- while you've hung on to your job and a pretty salary?" "Didn't we agree you'd spend full time on the Project while I acted as consultant between trips?" Bill shot back. "Yeah, I quit a fair job as first officer on a freighter to handle it." "And you are guaranteed fair wages and a fat slice of any profits we make," Bill snapped. "The thing I didn't like in that interview of yours was that starry-eyed eyewash about our ancestor being a man of vision, a philosopher and a dreamer. That's a helluva tag to put on us -- 'The Dream Boys'! Good God!" Tom stood up, facing his brother in icy silence. Finally he said, "Is that all you've got to offer -- a lotta carping criticism?" The planes of Bill's cheeks flattened under the downward pull at his mouth corners. The black ugly tide was running in him now and he could not stop its sweep. His fear of space, the frantic will to escape from it again, all the irritation and anger were deep currents and he was a mere piece of flotsam tossing on the advancing wave of the black tide. He said, "No, damn you. I've got something else in my craw too. ft's Christy. I've seen the way you look at her, and I know that whenever my back is turned you're doing your damnedest to break us up!" Tom's face turned gray and suddenly his eyes were wide open. Knots stood out on the points of his jaws. In a strange half choked voice he said, "That's a blasted lie -- and you know it. It's an excuse to cover up for your own peculiar behavior lately. I think -- " Christy broke in with. "Bill -- Tom, for heaven's sake stop it!" Her beseeching eyes were glancing sharply from one to the other in growing panic. Bill stood lightly on his feet, his fingers curling and uncurling into balled fists. Tom went on, a bleak look in his eyes. "I think you've been in a soft berth too long. The monopoly you work for has softened you, taken out the guts a man needs to stand on his own feet -- " Bill suddenly stiffened. His right shot out in a hard, sharp blow' that crashed against Tom's chin. Tom grunted, a surprised look in his eyes, and sagged to the floor. For a moment Bill stood over him, nostrils flaring, his whole body tense and waiting. But Tom was too groggy to get up. "Oh, Bill, how could you!" Christy cried out, dropping to her knees beside Tom. Bill strode with measured step to the door. There he turned, and looking back with a sneer, said. "Sweet dreams, Dream Boy!" I N A luxurious office of Asteroid Mining Corporation on the twenty-third floor of a Manhattan skyscraper a furious official of the corporation faced an uncomfortable underling. "I've heard of some pretty crude tricks in my time, Heilman, but breaking into the Staker Company's office like a common house thief takes the tin medal for low grade brains!" the official ranted, pounding his desk. "I suppose you thought that was an excellent way to advance yourself in the corporaIt!-, tif'ii ell? Finesse, Heilman, finesse. Tiit's what it takes in matters like this. Asteroid Mining, before it got the monopoly, stopped competition, but not by common housebreak  # J ln g "But -- but I thought," Heilman explained lamely, "that we could get a copy of their trajectory and then deal with them after they got out to the quadrant. You know, fire a 'meteor' at them, blanket them with radio jamming, ruin their radar sighting -- " The official snorted and leaned disgustedly back in his leather chair. "No, no you big dumb ox! You're retired from the team, benched. Now you can sit on the sidelines and watch how the first string fix Staker and Company." When Bill asked for his key, the clerk handed him the key and a faintly lavender tinted envelope. Mystified by the feminine handwriting, Bill sat in a lobby chair, and tore open the jasmine scented envelope. The note was brief. It said, "Dear Captain Staker: Please call on me at your earliest convenience, Apt. #B. It is a matter of utmost importance to both of us. Margo." Ever since leaving Tom's office, Bill's mind had been spinning about a center of hatred and ugly rumination. But now the stimulus of the jasmine fragrance struck a spark of adventure on the edge of his churning mind. The tangential path led off into inviting mysterious shadows and he was going to follow. The elevator stopped at the apartment floor of the hotel's north Tower. In the softly lighted corridor his feet fell soundlessly on the deep pile rug. He turned a corner, then walked up a short flight of steps to the door of Apt. #B. In response to his knock the door was opened by a vision in white satin. She was startlingly beautiful. Dark heavy lashes, creamy skin, white even teeth in a flashing smile, a lithe body poised with the ease of a jungle cat. She was fulsome and high breasted, and as she followed Bill's quick appraising glance, she seemed to smile knowingly that all he saw was displayed to best advantage. Hat in hand Bill said, "I'm -- I'm Captain Staker." With a throaty laugh that could have been carefully timed, she said, "And I'm Margo. Come right in Captain." Bill walked onto a white rug, and unobtrusively took in the rich furniture Twenty First Century Modern, the warm brown of the logarithm ruled walls, paintings in the style of Van Gogh, sharply angled table lamps, the gold drapes at the windows. "It was kind of you to come so promptly," Margo continued, settling into a chair. Bill brought his glance back to her. "Well, frankly, I was curious to know what a perfect stranger could have in common with me." She laughed indulgently. "Nasty of me, wasn't it? -- taking advantage of a human weakness." She gestured at Scotch and bourbon on the coffee table. "I'll let you do us the honors, Captain. Bourbon for me." Presently, glass in hand and a spreading warmth in him, Bill fixed the girl with a quizzical look. "Tell me, Margo, just what is this matter of utmost importance to both of us?" She put her glass on the table, then sat back and Bill felt the full impact of her dark lustrous eyes. "It's a business matter. Captain. You've been recommended a? a man of high purpose and dependability. As the heir to my father's controlling interest in Intercontinental Lines I am badly in need of a man with your experience to handle traffic details." Bill lifted a brow. "Intercontinental Lines? Never heard of it. Exclusively airline traffic on Earth"? "It's a new company formed under monopoly regulations. Of course, I realize you're a spaceman, but staying on Earth would have its compensations. You can name your own salary." Bill leaned forward and mixed another drink. This was something unexpected and pretty tempting too. No more fighting his fear of space. He downed the drink in a few gulps, then stood up. "Well, I -- I'd like to think things over," he said with hesitation, walking slowly to the window. Margo followed, saying, "I don't mean to rush you, Bill -- yet the situation needs your experienced hand." "I know, but my brother and I are all set to make a scouting trip to Beta Quadrant." Margo leaned against the window drapes, smiling with frank admiration. "I know you are. How in the world you can take off from Earth and hit a target far out in space is beyond me. Is it something like firing artillery?" The warm glow already suffusing Bill's senses took on added lustre when he looked into her questioning eyes. Expansively, he began drawing diagrams, and explaining the elements of space navigation. "Now here's the trajectory my brother and I are planning to use," he went on, drawing a complex curve with loading figures and fuel consumption and point of contact with the Beta Quadrant. When he paused once, Margo touched the gold sunburst emblem on his arm. "That's fascinating, Bill, but making a trip like yours is all a gamble. I'm not offering you a gamble. I'm offering you a sure thing." "Yes, I realize that." Bill got to his feet. "But just the same I want to think your proposition over, Margo." She leaned toward him putting her hands on his lapels. "Bill, don't risk your neck out there in space. I need you desperately in the company." Suddenly, Bill was electrically aware of cool, smooth arms sliding up and around his neck and her soft red mouth within fragrance distance. And he was exquisitely aware of the full soft length of her pressing against him. The scent of jasmine reached him with bewitching stealth. That was when he closed the gap to her mouth in a sudden rush. Bill came out of a whirling state of pure feeling to hear the visiphone buzzing insistently. "The phone," he mumbled. Margo opened her eyes dreamily, then comprehended. She walked over to the phone, picked up the receiver. After a moment she turned around looking at him questioningly. "It's for you. Bill." He took the phone and said, "Captain Staker speaking." The desk clerk said, "A gentleman to see you, sir. Shall I send him to Apt. #B?" "No" Bill answered. "I'll be down to my room in a few moments and see him there." He turned to Margo. "I guess business comes before idyll, Margo. I've got to go." Her lustrous dark eyes searched his face intently. "How long must I wait for an answer. Bill?" "Can you wait until Thursday -- three days?" Time enough to thresh things out with Tom. "I guess I can," Margo said, touching him with an inviting glance, "but do I have to wait that long before I see you again?" Bill grinned and shook his head in wonder. "My lord, what persistence! I got an idea any visiting would not be entirely social. Somewhere along the line business would rear its shaggy head. Okay, how about dinner at the Wedgewood Room tomorrow night?" "Wonderful!" Later at his own floor to his surprise he found Tom pacing the. corridor. In a strained voice he said, "The clerk said a gentleman -- " Tom came back in a conciliatory tone, "And I don't fit the description, eh? Well, anyway. Bill, we got things to talk over. How about it?" Bill shrugged noncommittally, unlocked his door and the two entered. Perched on the arm of a chair. Bill lighted a cigarette and pulled deeply of it. "Well, what is it?" He glanced coolly at his brother sitting with his left leg dangling over the arm of his chair. Tom cleared his throat and said, "I -- er, came to see how we're stacking up. Bill. After all we got a big show on our hands and the whole world is waiting for the curtain to go up. But we can't be squabbling between ourselves when we go on stage. Let's settle matters now and get on with our job -- after all we both got a lot at stake in the company." Bill studied the end of his cigarette a long moment. "I guess you might as well count me out, Tom. I'm quitting the show." Furrows appeared above Tom's brows. "Quitting! And after all you've put into the venture? Bill, have you gone nuts?" He stopped a moment. Then he said, "Oh, I guess I see the light. Christy eh? Well, Bill, honest -- and I really mean this -- you can have all the profits of the trip if I'm guilty of trying to take Christy away from you. You've got the wrong slant on things." Bill shrugged, saying, "It's not that -- and I still am not convinced -- it's just that I'm considering another proposition." Tom got to his feet in agitation, looking down at Bill incredulously. "My God, Bill, you sure have changed! What about all those bull sessions we had reading and rereading the George Staker philosophy of free enterprise? The world needs an object lesson to show how far it has strayed from those first wonderful days of the Atomic Age. We are heirs. Bill by special franchise, Old George saw the shape of things to come pretty clearly, and it's up to us to carry out his vision of things as they should be." Bill ground out his cigarette in a tray. His underlip crowded out stubbornly. 'T'm not going." For a moment Tom stared hard at Bill, and a heavy singing silence lay between them. Then Tom strode to the door and opened it. "All right, Bill -- you and I are through!" The door slammed. For awhile Bill sat looking at it, wondering why the slammed door reminded him of looking at his reflection in the bathroom mirror and telling himself "I'm scared -- scared as hell. And if I don't get hold of myself. I'm through -- washed up!" busily dressing, the ultrafax popped out the breakfast edition. "Space Bird takes off for Beta Quadrant. Tom Staker gambles all." Bill stared at the pictures of the rocket climbing savagely at the head of a column of fire. The crazy, stubborn fool. Going it alone-, risking his neck and everybody else's aboard. Well, let him go out there and break his blasted neck on the Asteroid Belt. For the next three days Bill saw much of Margo. She was the most exciting thing he had ever discovered, and he indulged her laughingly when she took to speaking of his position in Intercontinental Lines as an accomplished fact. On the third day he took Margo to lunch, a Margo with shining eyes, for this was Bill's day of decision. She had done her work well. He ordered for them, and added, "Also a bottle of champagne." The waiter brought the champagne first. There was no doubt on Margo's features what this was about, even though it had always been "if", "maybe" "possibly" in Bill's discussions with her about the new job. In the midst of picking up his glass and proposing a toast, "Here's to my new -- " Bill stopped. The ultrafax had popped out a sheet. Carefully putting the glass down, he said, "That's a special bulletin." Picking it up he read aloud, "Staker Rocket in serious trouble. Home field reports damage by small meteor. Crew on emergency air bottles. Mysterious emanations blind radar scope and disrupt communication with Earth." Tom -- and the others, out there fighting for their lives against suffocation and intense cold. Their quarrel seemed like the antics of teenagers now. He had to get out to the field, see if he c ould help. "What are you going to do?" Margo was watching him intently, the knuckles of her small hands white. "I'm going to the field." "But -- but what about that toast you were making to your new -- job, that's what you were going to say, wasn't it?" Her eyes were intense spots of jet. "I guess that'll have to wait, Margo," he told her. "I can't stand by when Tom needs help." Margo clutched his hands convulsively. "Bill, don't take a rocket up or you'll die in the same trap he's dying in!" The words rushed out as if through a trapdoor she could not control. Bill glanced at her with sharp, new interest. "How do you know it's a trap, and how do you know he's going to die?" Tears began to well up in her large eyes. "All I can tell you is don't go out there, Bill. I don't want to lose you -- now." Dawning realization filled Bill with horror. "Margo -- Margo, for God's sake, what kind of a game have you been playing with me!" Margo's shoulders sagged, and she began to sob out her story. "Bill, please, please believe me. I love you. That was not my part of the agreement with Asteroid Mining -- to fall in love with you. Yes, I was hired to separate you and your brother, break up your company." Before Bill could snarl an answer to that, a hotel service clerk came with a portable phone. "Call for you, sir." With his eyes fixed steadily on Margo, he spoke into the transmitter, "Captain Staker." Christy's strained and tearful voice came over the wire. "Bill, oh, Bill, we're getting terrible news here at the field. Tom's ship is losing oxygen!" "Yes, I know," he answered. "I just got the Ultra on it. I'll be right out, Christy." As he replaced the phone he looked at Margo with a grim, loathing expression. "A female trick as old as the universe and I had to fall for it. You and your innocent questions about our Quadrant trajectory! What a sucker I was!" He drew back his hand to slap her but decided against it. She was crying when he left. On the way to the field the familiar but forgotten black tide of fear rose up like a spectre once more to scatter his gathering ideas for helping Tom. Resigning himself to its power and pulling over to the roadside, he sat still, gripping the wheel. Yes, he told himself tensely, here I sit while Tom and the others drift in space needing help. The realization of their need slowly gave him a greater objective clarity than he had ever had before. He began to see himself now for what he was -- a cringing weakling stripped naked of all manliness at the first show of evil. Though he perhaps had been worse than the average, this was the trouble with his whole security minded generation. They never dreamed great dreams like George Staker and his era which wrested atomic power from the treasure house of nature. No, this generation carefully followed safe, charted paths in the world of ideas. It had given up its freedom to a world of government controlled monopolies. And Tom, taking up the torch left by their creatively imaginative ancestor, was trying to recapture a small facet of that golden age, Mid-Twentieth Century mind. as the black tide receded over the horizon of his inner world. He took a new firm grip on the wheel, and took off again at high speed. Christy was at the field office waiting outside. As he stepped out of the car, she threw her arms around him. "Oh, Bill, what can you do for Tom now?" He said gently, "I'll bring him back for you." She drew back her head to look at him incredulously, "You still think -- ! Oh, Bill, you foolish guy, you're the one I love, the one I've always loved." For a moment he searched her eyes and saw only a revelation of honest feeling. A surging gladness flooded through him, releasing an unconscious hard ball of tension inside. "Christy, what a knothead I've been!" He gathered her up to kiss her fervently. "So long, Christy. Old Staker was a piker at dreaming compared to what I'm dreaming for you and me!" The field men had the rocket fueled up and provisioned to go. "This'll be no picnic, but there's a prize out there if we want it bad enough. You'll all have a share in it, instead of handing it all over to the government. Are you with Tom and me?" "Sure, Bill. Let's go!" "Yeah, let's open ! er wide up!" They all clambered up the ship's access ladder in high spirits. In a moment a warning red signal rocket shot into the sky and burst, warning all local aircraft. Another five minutes and the rocket leapt off the Earth with a long, shattering roar. Bill kept the fissioning metals pouring through the atomic explosive after-chambers until the men screamed at the acceleration. Finally he eased it off to free flight and the Space Dragon followed the trajectory of the Space Bird. All the way he hovered over the radar scope. Then after long hours of fatiguing watching he crawled into his bunk. Later he woke up to Radarman Jones' voice in his ear. "Captain -- wake up. We've picked up a ship on the scope!" Bill piled out and forced his floating feet to magnetic contact with the steel deck. He followed Jones down the short corridor to the communications cabin. At the radar scope Bill studied the ship, then gave orders decelerating the Space Dragon. "There's another ship!" Jones exclaimed, pointing at the edge of the scope. Bill peered at the new ship, studying its characteristics. Then he nodded his head. "It's the Space Bird all right. But that first one -- I got an idea it must be an Asteroid Mining ship.Margo must have transmitted the Space Bird trajectory to Asteroid Mining. I don't see how anybody would know where to find us in such immense distances as Beta Quadrant." Stepping over to the communications panel he called the Space Bird. No answer, and though he kept calling he could not raise the ship. Then he called Staker Field on Earth. "Caxton?" The field came back. "Staker Field. Go ahead." I # "Caxton, we've found the Space Bird but can't speak them, so I'm cutting you in on communications with an Asteroid Mining ship that's hanging around. Tape pictures and sound -- the whole works." "Okay." Flipping another switch. Bill called the strange ship on the allinterplanetary frequency. Suddenly after long minutes of silence the dark screen lighted up with the impassive features of a round faced, cold eyed man. "Yeah? This is the Pluton. What d'you want -- and who are you?" "This is the Space Dragon -- sister ship to the Space Bird there in your vicinity. What's the matter with our ship?" The man's eyes darkened and his jaws tightened. "There's plenty wrong with it, Space Dragon. And the same thing's going to be wrong with your ship, too. A 'meteor' is going to hit your ship the same as hit the Space Bird. Asteroid Mining doesn't like competitors horning in their business!" Bill shot back grimly, "I'm glad to hear your views on competition. Mister. The whole world is interested in our Project Venture, and when they hear what you said there's going to be hell to pay. Because, you see, everything you say and how you look saying it is being recorded back at Staker Field on Earth!" The other man's impassive face suddenly turned into a ludicrous mask of a man burning his fingers on hot chestnuts. The two way hook-up abruptly ended. On the scope Bill and Jones watched the image of the Pluton begin to move across the scope and finally out of range in the opposite direction toward Asteroid Mining's Omega Quadrant. Hours later the Space Dragon made physical contact with Tom's ship. Bill was the first one through the communicating airlock. Tom, his face drawn and haggard, met him as he emerged in the ship. The rest of the crew were ly ing still to conserve air. "Hi, Bill. Boy, are we glad to see you. That 'meteor' they threw at us confined us on air bottles in the forward compartments." Bill shook his hand warmly. "We got enough air for all of us. After we patch tilings up here, let's start carving us a chunk of private enterprise." Tom's tired eyes lighted up. "Hm, say, you're so right! Our geigers have found enough floating ore in Beta Quadrant already to make a big nick in Asteroid's business. Bill gave him a mock salute, "Okay, skipper. You've earned the title of Head Dreamer, and I'll help make your dreams come true!" who enters T racy's Department Store is not always right, but as far as you are concerned, he is. By Waldo T. Boyd blinked three times. Trevor Anson arranged his tie at just the nattily precise angle, waved his hand before a hidden lighting-effect switch in the smooth marble pillar at the entrance to the display room, and faced the elevator. This would be a "green light" customer -- a firsttime prospect, and three blinks indicated a very difficult individual. Anson quickly practiced his most beguiling smile. "Welcome to Tracy's Roboid Department," he said, enthusiastically, as the elevator doors slid open. His practiced smile was just right. He quickly noted the man's conservative dress, the flaming red tie. Aggressive type, Anson decided. A shock of red hair that didn't want to lie down hinted that he was stubborn as well. "Heard you've got a sale on robots," Red-tie said, challengingly, as he stepped aside for his wife. The woman who stepped off the elevator smiled, showing a lovely dimple, and Anson beamed on her. The tiny flake ol a hat perched atop her auburn hair reminded Anson of the comb on a Rhode Island Red. "Not robots, sir," Anson corrected diplomatically. "The PlastiCast Roboid is not exactly a robot." "Well, anyhow, trot one out, and will never be satisfied until she's seen one of the things." He glared dramatically in the general direction of his w'ife, who pretended not to notice. Anson led them into the Gray Room. He mentally went over the applicable rule: Rule #; Always introduce the marked-down merchandise first. It may provide the customer with an incentive lor buying something better. "These are last year's models," he said, with just the right flavor of distaste in his voice. "Of course, you may expect a slight reduction... a small percentage... Red-tie was muttering. "Damned mechanical things, full of wheels and wires. What's to keep 'em from "But dear, they don't have wheels anymore," protested the woman, timidly. Her face was pretty, Anson decided, but it was obvious that the man would be the deciding factor in this sale. He made a mental note: Rule #: Pick the individual of a family group who seems to hold the decidbered a portion of a sales talk he had memorized a few days before, and took it up, almost chanting: "... our Roboids are grown, much as crystals are grown, in great vats in New Chicago. A Plasti-Cast Roboid is guaranteed..." "A fat chance we'd have of collecting the guarantee if we were chopped into mincemeat," Red-tie interrupted, shuddering slightly as the implication of his own words hit him. Anson felt a moment of panic as he failed to remember an applicable rule from the Salesman's Guide, but it formed in his mind at the last moment: Rule #: Never argue with a customer -- change the subject. "Why don't you come with me to the Green Room?" he asked. "The very latest models are on display." He walked slowly at first, then more quickly as the couple allowed themselves to be led. He slid his hand near a hidden switch in the archway, and floodlights came on just as they entered. The woman uttered a little squeal of delight at the sight of a very handsome figure dressed in a cutaway, standing in an attitude of service. "Oh!" she breathed dreamily. "He would make such a wonderful bulter." "Well, wind him up and let's see what he'll do," growled the man, his face florid in the colored light of the Green Room. "I'm so very sorry," Anson said, slightly flustered, remembering that this was always the crucial moment in a sale. "The Roboid cannot be activated for demonstration purposes." "What?" roared Red-tie, incredulously. "Do you mean to say you want me to buy the damned thing without knowing whether it ticks or not?" Anson tried desperately to remember the best rule for such an answer, but failed. He plunged desperately into his own explanation. "You see, our Roboids are matched to your family personality at the time of purchase, and activated then. We cannot erase a personality once it has been transferred to their sensitive minds." He saw the disbelieving smirk on the man's mouth and felt that the sale was indeed lost. But he plunged on, desperately. "They're very economical. They don't require any upkeep, like food. When they become tired they will sit or lie down near an electric outlet and plug in a power cord, and in a few minutes they are as rested and tireless as..." "Bosh!" Red-tie retorted. "I've still have time to try Bonn's new Helio-rotor. At least they'll give us a demonstration." Anson escorted them to the Magna-lift. He felt better as he recalled the last rule in the Guide, the one that seemed to cover the situation so well: Rule #: If they balk because of the no-demonstration rule, let them go. They will be back when they have seen one of their friends with a Plasti-Casi Roboid. "Good-bye, Sir; Madam," Anson said wearily, as the Magna-lift doors closed, "Come again soon." He breathed a sigh of relief as the elevator cage dropped them from sight. A salesman, who had been standing by, spoke to Anson. "People are such dears at times, aren't they?" he said. "How'ever, it's time for your rest period. I'll take over now." "Thank you so much," Anson replied tiredly. He walked to a tiny room at the far end of the great showroom and closed the door. He stretched wearily out on a low, folding cot, the only piece of furniture, and reached for a tiny black power cord hanging nearby. Deftly he plugged it into the socket under his armpit, and breathed deeply, relaxedly. "Yes," he chanted softly, drifting off to sleep," people are such dears sometimes." Of I, published bi-monthly at Buffalo, New York, for October #, #. The names and addresses of the publisher, editor, maim i  dltnr. and business managers are: Publisher, Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., #  Union Ave., Kingston, N. Y. ; Editor, James L. Quinn, # Clinton Avenue, Kingston, N. Y. ; Managing editor. None ; Business manager, None... #. The owner is: (if owned by a corporation, its name and mM must be stated and also immediately thereunder the names and addresses of stockln-M th owning or holding I percent or more of total amount of stock.) Quinn Publishing Company, Inc., # Clinton Avenue, Kingston, N. Y. ; .Tames L. Quinn, # Clinton Avenue, Kingston, New York. #. The known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders owning or holding I percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities are : None. #. The two paiagraphs next above, giving the names of owners, stockholders, and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stockholders mu security holders as they appear upon the books of the company but also, in cases where I lie stockholder or security holder appears upon the books of the coin puny ns trustee nr in any other fiduciary relation, the name of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing affiant's full knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of tin company ns trustees, hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any. other person, association, or corporation has any interest direct or indirect in the said stock, bonds, or other securities (lion ns so stated by him. #. The average number of copies of each issue of this publication sold or distributed, through the mails or otherwise, to paid subscribers during the # # months preceding the date shown above was: (This information is required from daily, weekly, semiweekly, and triweekly newspapers only). James L. Quinn, Editor . Sworn to and subscribed before me this #th day of September, #. (seaIj) Evelyn Dorothy Hubbard (My commission expires March #) The Sea Between the Planets space, no one will be able to tell about the condition of weightlessness, the absence of gravity, the state of "free fall" that can be experienced. We know that antigravity devices seem improbable. Yet it is extremely desirable to know how a human being feels and behaves in free fall, in a state of null-gravity. Scientists have been beating their heads against a solid wall endeavoring to think up some way, no matter how inadequate, of simulating this situation. Parachute jumpers offer one possibility. In a sense, when they are falling freely, before their parachutes open, they are in the equivalent situation of a rocket man floating free in his space suit. Unfortunately they can't fall for a very long time without having to open their chutes. In addition, even during the moments of so-called free fall, they are too conscious of the highspeed air-stream flowing around them. Shock, wind, cold -- all such conditions -- lessen the sensation of true free fall. The idea of a freely falling elevator also simulates gravity-less-ness. But here too the duration of unhindered fall is slight. Even if an artificial elevator structure of great height were constructed, the period of being in free fall would be short, because in a short time the snubbers and shock absorbers would have to take hold and ease the freely falling elevator to rest. There is a strong possibility, however, that such a structure might be built in the not very distant future, for it would enable space surgeons and medical men interested in human reactions to space flight to get some accurate observed data on biological behavior under no gravity. In fact, this will probably be done soon, for medical men are clamoring for data which they just can't get in any other way. The free-floating of a rubbersuited swimmer whose bouyancy in water is just one, is a rough simulation, in a sense, of weightlessness and free fall, although here the presence of the water medium is highly deceptive. At least the tremendous freedom of motion with the consequent loss of sense of direction helps a lot in giving the feeling of free fall. The sea between the planets is of a far more tenuous stuff than water! The free-fall elevator mentioned above is about the one chance we on Earth will have of experiencing free fall. Constructed vertically along the side of a cliff or high mountain, say, only as high as ten thousand feet -- by no means an impossible engineering feat -- an elevator system would provide a considerable amount of information on how the human body reacts to weightlessness, at least for periods of a few minutes. The falling elevator, stream-lined and projectileshaped, could avoid acquiring the conventional terminal velocity for quite a while, and thus duplicate considerably the conditions within a space ship in free space without acceleration. As soon as the plans for actual manned rockets come a little closer to reality, we arc likely to see and hear a lot of organizations trumpeting for one of these space duplicators. The technicians and medical men will have a hard time trying to prevent people from sneaking a ride one way or another. Come to think of it, if an amusement park were to install such an elevator, it might do a hearty business! Skyrocket #-#... is the better word -- catapulted across the sky at the incredible speed of thirteen hundred miles an hour! This recently released news shows that we are finally beginning to produce sound original research in rocket engines instead of being content merely to copy and modify German rockets. The behavior and use of the new experimental craft compares with the plane-intercepting rockets the Germans were using in the last days of World War II. The Skyrocket is a small plane, with the barest traces of swept-back wings; it is powered solely by rockets and was launched from the belly of a B-# at thirty thousand feet. From this altitude it climbed almost vertically to eighty thousand feet and then zoomed in a series of maneuvers designed to test its strength. It came through with flying colors, and despite a flight-duration measured in minutes -- about four for this plane -- it showed great promise as the ultimate interceptor type. When the fuel was exhausted the pilot glided to a safe landing and reported on the behavior of the rocket. He reported that the rocket shot through the "sonic" barrier without any of the yawing, vibration or other faults which have characterized that operation with jets. His personal reactions to the flying qualities of the rocket were slight, since he was basically operating from instruments and, to all intents and purposes, flying blind. This single flight is not in itself extraordinarily spectacular, but it is indicative of what is in the cards. If such information has been released it is safe to assume that considerably more progressive work has already been done on other straight rocket craft. It is interesting to consider that all that holds rocketry back is the matter of fuel nothing else. In a way, it is as though we knew all about airplanes and their flight but didn't have powerful enough engines. That is exactly the position of rocketry. Chemical fuels, no matter how they are concocted, still haven't the "oomph" to take rockets where they are able to go. We won't see reafly startling advances in rocket flight until one of two things happens: either some government will decide to build a chemical steprocket to go to the Moon, and hang the expense, or some geniuses will tie atomic energy to rocket engines. Until then rockets are doomed to be chained by gravity to the relatively thin shell of Terran air. Greatly encouraging is the fact that the military are growing concerned with the uses to which rockets may be put. Maybe they can persuade Uncle Sam to finance Lunar flight! Transistor in Transition... "ramis in the framus" gadgets which, in the course of time, is going to change the lives of all of us -- and which, because of its unspectacular, technical nature, will rarely be appreciated by any but the technician. Yet every thinking person should be acquainted with it. It is the gadget which is inheriting the mantle of the Twentieth Century's most important invention, the vacuum tube. The gadget is called a "transistor" and was invented in the Bell Telephone Labs only a few years ago. Since then every laboratory on Earth has been working madly on it, and now it is ready to be applied on a wide scale. The transistor is nothing but a substitute for a vacuum tube -- "only it don't got no vacuum !" Physically the transistor is a sliver of germanium metal, sealed within a capsule scarcely as large as a sixth of a cigarette and with three or four tiny "cat's whisker" wires touching it. That's all there is to it. It has no filament or grid or plate like an ordinary radio tube. It requires no power input except a simple plate voltage. It gives off hardly any heat. It is insensible to shock and violence. It is small. It is not made of delicate glass. It is rugged. It is cheap. And its virtues could be recited ad infinitum. What does it do? It does everything ordinary radio tubes do! You take it from there, compiling, if you can, a small list of the things modern vacuum tubes do. You'll have a fabulous list! Electronics has burst on the world with miracles, but generally these have been dampened somewhat by the need for using tender tubes. The transistor overcomes this obstacle and wherever . a vacuum tube control can be substituted for human muscles or human mind, the new industrial transistor, a mere three years out of the development stage, can take over the job. If you think we live in an electronics age now, watch the next decade and note particularly that the vacuum tube will be limited to power applications. The transistor, simple to build, harder to understand in terms of its operation ( its theory involves "holes in space") is coming... Coming in the May issue: The author of that famous work, The Exploration of Space, brings to IF readers an exciting years ago. Don't miss -- (Continued from page #) mass and location has least effect on all solar systems outside its own." The young Lobian, obviously jubilant at having so far managed to be correct, studied his computations, adjusted several dials below the scanning screen and brought a single solar system into view. Twisting other dials, he brought the image nearer and nearer until only the sun could be seen on the small screen. Then he made a careful final adjustment, touched a switch, and one by one the planets of the solar system singly popped into view. With an apparatus resembling a four-dimensional slide rule. Junior made rapid calculations as each of the nine appeared. Then he laid aside the apparatus and watched the parade of planets begin to move by a second time. Halfway through he touched a button, stopping one planet on the screen. This he pointed at hopefully. It was the planet known on Earth as Mars. Plorace shook his head with a kind of triumphant sadness. "You see?" he telegraphed George. "He has the right solar system, but the wrong planet, though the one he indicated does have the least effect on all solar systems outside its own." George looked puzzled. "I don't quite follow that myself." "I specified provable planet. The one Junior picked is too small for a practical experiment with the equipment we have available." The teacher glanced at George. "It is only natural you would miss that point, for of course you don't know our school equipment. But only yesterday its limitations were explained to Junior. You see how forgetting to include all the data in his calculations causes your son to err?" George nodded reluctantly. His antennae blushing a fiery red, Junior again fiddled with dials and brought the planet we call Earth into view. "There!" he telegraphed. Horace radioed his approval, an affirmative grunt. George beamed his pride. A door in back of Marshall Igor Matoshek opened and his watching and listening audience saw the tall, soldierly figure of General Serge Marik appear on the screen. Silently the aide-de-camp banded a slip of paper to the most important man in all the world. The Marshall adjusted his spectacles, frowned at the note and a flush of anger mounted to his cheeks. He waved the general away. "Comrades," he announced. "I have just received the answer the President of the Tri-federation of North America has made to our reasonable offer of peaceful terms. I will not bore you with the full context, but it amounts to a categorical refusal." "You will wait for my signal, of course," Horace radioed Junior. "When your adjustments are complete, please transmit them to me clearly." "Yes Sir," Junior sent back. "Azimuth two-hundred seventeen mils, five-hundred and two micromils. Elevation minus eight mils, thirty-six micromils." "It is necessary to check students' data very carefully," Horace explained to George. "If by error we destroyed the entire solar system, it might throw us off our orbit sufficiently to cause mild weather changes. Conceivably it could even cause slight Lobequakes. The elimination of the single planet's mass will have only slight effect on its own solar system, however. Not enough to seriously incommode any life there may be on the other planets. And of course it will have no effect whatever on solar systems other than its own." "Comrades and citizens of the world," Marshall Igor Matoshek said, "you are about to witness an event beside which all other events of the past pale to insignificance." He raised one arm and spoke in a thunderous voice. "Fire!" "Fire," Horace transmitted absently, and as Junior touched the proper button, turned apologetically to George. "I am afraid you don't find this very interesting. After all, it's pretty elementary stuff." ( Continued from page #) resurrect #. But they'd gain nothing. There would still be an extra plate. You see? "So they destroyed the plate. He knew they would. And they also had to go back through the records, to Earth, through the security files there, through the birth records, everything. And they destroyed every trace, every shred of evidence that No. # ever existed." So he kept the memory alive and that kept #I alive while the other prisoners become automatons, hearing, feeling, sensing nothing except the bells. Remembering nothing, anticipating nothing. But #I could remember something magnificent, and so he could anticipate, and that was hope, and faith. He found that no one really believed him but he kept on telling it anyway, the story of the Plan. "Maybe this number didn't exist," someone would say. "If there's no record anywhere -- " #I would smile. "In my head, there's where the record is. # know. # remember." And so it was that #I was the only one who still remembered and who could still smile when sometime after that -- no one in the prison colony knew how long -- the Underground was victorious, and the Managerial System crumbled. I 'Padtmcut  Dear Mr. Quinn : I wish to take issue with the opinions expressed by "pwf" on pages # and # of your November issue. "You understand the law... or you... stop eating," pwf says. But he evidently does not understand the law. He proves this by a comparison of historical technological progress with the stock market. He must be aware that an analogy is good only if the points of resemblance are demonstrated so rigorously that some other form of argument would usually be less involved and require no additional reasoning. In other words, the chief use of an analogy is to impress the unthinking. Mr. pwf, by depending entirely on analogy without any demonstration, shows he realizes the weakness of his argument. The reasons for rises and falls in the stock market are fairly simple and obvious, and can be expressed as an almost entirely uncomplicated feedback equation. Can pwf do the same for the causes of technological progress? Until he can, where is his analogy. (The equation mentioned above shows the conditions of a collapse, but it is extremely difficult to determine by observation whether these conditions are present. Hence the early wolf-crying mentioned by pwf.) Rise and fall is not the pattern of every action known. Until pwf can show that technological progress has the characteristics of actions showing this pattern rather than of those showing other patterns, his argument must remain suspect. I have concentrated on technological progress because this seems to have been all taken in by pwf's very narrow view. Actually, I think the prospect of decline in other fields much more likely. We may well be heading for a period of superscientific moronism. You can see from this I am not being merely Pollyanna-ish. I think the prospects of decline excellent and frightening, and would appreciate seeing some real debate on this question, provided that it is conducted on a somewhat more concrete level than was done in Mr. pwf's undoubtedly well-written article. Some attention must be paid to facts, such as now existing trends in all fields, the cycles of past civilizations, and the level to which knowledge and dispersion thereof must reach before becoming no longer totally destructible; less to ghostly and unreliable analogies. -- Michael Wigodsky Houston, Texas We think pwf was writing of generalities and the over-all cycles of I # human progress and decline rather than attempting to make a specific analogy of humanity , reduced to a common denominator , and its foreshadoived doom. However, there can be interesting debate -- and we'd like to hear froth someone who wishes to take it up with Mr. Wi god sky. Dear Editor: The November issue of IF was excellent, in my opinion. I congratulate you on the pictures on the inside back and front covers. It looks so much better than when it was plain. When I pick up an IF mag I read it from cover to cover. I just finished the November issue and I find I like "The Image and the Likeness" best... Please remember to run lots of short stories... One complaint -- Why didn't the cover have anything to do with the rest of the book? You put out a good mag... It is the best science fiction magazine in the United States. Keep up the good work. -- Richard F. Allen Framingham, Mass, That's a mighty fine compliment. We thank you!... Now, about the covers on IF: beginning with the November issue, our policy is to vary our covers. Some will be symbolical (November issue) some will illustrate a story, some will suggest a theme -- whichever offers the strongest approach to originality and effectiveness. Dear Mr. Quinn : A letter in "The Postman Cometh" (November issue) literally drove me to compose my first "letter to the editor". This letter represents, in my opinion, the height of bigotry and intolerance! The writer is "chagrined" to find that fanzine reviews are requested. His "worst fears are realized". He is "nauseated" at letters using "slangy drivel". The presumptuousness of such readers is astonishing. They are, in effect, demanding that a mass circulation magazine be tailored to their personal specifications without regard to the interests of others. The fact that I enjoy fanzines is beside the point. I do not like your Science Briefs section, but I would not dream of suggesting that your other readers be deprived of the enjoyment and instruction they find therein. I have no sympathy for "nausea" caused by letters using "infantilisms" such as "terrif", "groovy", etc. Or even "egad", "gazooks", or "goshwowoboyoboyoboy" ! The average adolescent science fiction reader is, as a rule, considerably advanced intellectually beyond his age level. The fact that they express their enthusiasm and opinions in the patois of their contemporaries should not deprive them of the right to self-expression that you offer all buyers and readers of your magazine. Science fiction belongs to youth -- let them speak! -- P. H. Economou Miami, Florida miles from base, approximately # miles above surface of the Moon. Televised image reveals it to be hostile. Base Command switches to automatic pilot control and both missiles converge on target for crash dive. Pursuit is similar to principle of dog hunting rabbit, only instead of following a scent, missiles follow a metallic surface and image of the craft. Two missiles insure complete destruction. (Drawings by Ed Vatigursky.) Puzzles in Every Issue! America's greatest value in puzzle pleasure, # pages chock full of brand new puzzles of every variety and fascinating articles of interest to puzzle lovers everywhere! Just ask your local news dealer -- only #c at all stands. EiaSNB"Zl i U m t p #"  A fjt z' fy  l standpoint. Its eroded hills and ice caps would be the only relief in the monotonous horizon of barren wasteland. Perpetual dust storms, insufficient atmosphere, and blinding sun would inflict physical discomforts. Here, explorers study the terrain as their space ship makes aerial studies. The deep crevices that split the desert could be the "canals" that form geometric patterns in the astronomers telescope. On the horizon is one of the ice, or polar, caps. All Stories New and Complete Cover by Ken Fagg IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn Publishing Co., Inc. Office of publication, # Lord Street, Buffalo, New York. Entered as Second Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction; any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. Not responsible for unsolicited artwork or manuscripts. #c a copy. Printed in U.S. A. Next issue on sale May #th of faith in that old adage that says "it is difference of opinion that makes horse races". I think the coiner of that was a great American named Samuel Clemens, who was bom in Florida, Missouri, over a hundred years ago. He wrote a lot of kinda wonderful stuff about the Mississippi and other things under the pseudonym of Mark Twain. Remember it? Well, I guess I didn't take that "difference of opinion" quite literally enough. I shoulda known that when it says horse races it means horse races. Anyhow, IF ain't a horse-racing sheet -- so I've been wrong. About disagreeing, or difference of opinion, that is. Especially about the writers who write for IF. But I've seen the light... The light was in a letter I got recently from a gentleman up in Houlton, Maine, who seems to have read a science fiction magazine for the first time. He says he wouldn't have bothered reading it but for his "very persuasive brother, who, like others, is very fanatic about this kind of literature". Well, all that's okay. There's them what likes science fiction and them what don't. It's a free country and all that, you know. But here's the part that showed me the light. Quote: "It seems to me as though your writers must be slightly crazy. They all disagree about the future in particular." Now, can you imagine anybody putting out a magazine with writers who disagree? It's absurd. Writers should all think and write alike. Anybody knows that if one writer says the human race is going to have green hair, lavender skin, three arms and five legs in the year #, by golly they're all gonna say it. The manuscript that says it's going to happen in # or # gets sent back. And I think I'd better get busy and write all our authors to the effect that anybody who fools around with ideas about future experiments in nuclear fission or gravity or brassieres without coming to an agreement with the others appearing in that issue is due for a blackball. at last. Now about our stories being "too fantastic to consider". I'll also have to correct that right away. Practically everybody knows that great writers of past centuries never dreamed up such fantastic things as steam power, air travel, underwater craft, radio, gravity, biotics, atomic power, astronomy. etc., etc. Anybody who ever read a history book knows that the immortals of science -- da Vinci, Faraday, Edison, Galileo, Newton, to name a few -- always got a unanimous vote of confidence from their readers and critics. Nobody considered their dreams fantastic. They never cooked up a broth that was centuries ahead of their times. For example, suppose somebody had put a television set down in front of George Washington, with Dagmar doing her stuff. Would he have cried fantastic! Not about the television set, he wouldn't. Television, which practically everybody has got a set of these days, wasn't fantastic in those days. This thing of writers letting their imaginations run off is bad stuff. They ought to stick to solid facts, something you can put your feet in. Like a pair of old galoshes or something. Come to think of it, somebody had to dream those up -- or did they? Remind me to ask a boot manufacturer sometime just how we got galoshes. However, an idea just barged into that thing I hang my hat on: Why not get out a reprint of the Podunk telephone directory? Then you can really check your facts. All you need is a pocketful of nickels and dimes. Whether the thought in the final paragraph applies to all science fiction magazines or not, I don't know, but here's how it goes: "A magazine like yours is hardly sensible reading for anyone." And he signs off with "truthfully", so I guess he means it. Now that dum right hurts. But I'm gonna take it to heart and request an IQ from everybody around the office. So I took this letter seriously and I hope our readers do, too. And when this gentleman from Maine borrows the next issue of IF, he'll be happy to see that all the writers therein have certificates stating that they have never been within # miles of a laughing academy, and what's more they'll all agree in their plots and ideas concerning the future. They're going to get their slide rules out and everyone is going to come up with the identical answer. run into a friend of mine last night who was one of "hell's angels" way back in # and #. His name is Henry Jones and he was one of those daredevil knights of the skies who formed part of that elite flying group known as the Lafayette Escadrille. Well, we got to chinning about flying in those days, when their "kites" were covered with a cloth fabric and painted with a substance known as "dope" and a #-calibre bullet came in one side and went out the other and they came back plenty mornings looking like a piece of Swiss cheese. Anyhow, we talked aviation clean up through the jet jobs of today that can crowd a thousand miles per hour. When the chin music was over, we had it all figured out how, ten years hence, we'd be crossing the Atlantic in better than three hours, with #passenger ram jets doing # miles per at # feet. You know, that's too fantas Now, about that little ole light. I'd a sworn it was around here some place. -- jlq A captivating new story, by the author of The Exploration of Space, in which a stubborn archeologist and an equally stubborn magazine reporter get delightfully inpdage about possession being nine-tenths of the law. By Arthur C. Clarke Illustrated by Ed Valigursky a small man that a special spacesuit had to be made for him. But what he lacked in physical size he more than made up -- as is often the case -- in sheer drive and determination. When I met him, he'd spent twenty years pursuing a dream. What is more to the point, he had persuaded a whole succession of hard-headed business men, World Council Delegates and administrators of scientific trusts, to underwrite his expenses and to fit out a ship for him. Despite everything that happened later, I still think that was his most remarkable achievement... The Arnold Toynbee had a crew of six aboard when we left Earth. Besides the Professor and Charles Ashton, his chief assistant, there was the usual pilot-navigator-engineer triumvirate and two graduate students -- Bill Hawkins and myself. Neither of us had ever gone into space before, and we were still so excited over the whole thing that we didn't care in the least whether we got back to Earth before the next term started. We had a strong suspicion that our tutor had very similar views. The reference he had produced for us was a masterpiece of ambiguity, but as the number of people who could even begin to read Martian script could be counted on the fingers of one hand, we'd got the job. As we were going to Jupiter, and not to Mars, the purpose of this particular qualification seemed a little obscure, though knowing something about the Professor's theories we had some pretty shrewd suspicions. They were partly confirmed when we were ten days out from Earth. The Professor looked at us very thoughtfully when we answered his summons. Even under zero g he always managed to preserve his dignity, while the best we could do was to cling to the nearest handhold and float around like drifting seaweed. I got the impression (though I may of course be wrong) that he was thinking "What have I done to deserve this?" as he looked from Bill to me and back again. Then he gave a sort of "It's too late to do anything about it now" sigh and began to speak in that slow, patient way he always does when he has something to explain. At least, he always uses it when he's speaking to us. "Since we left Earth," he said, "I've not had much chance to tell you the purpose of this expedition. Perhaps you've guessed it already." "I think I have," said Bill. "Well, go on," replied the Professor, a peculiar gleam in his eye. I did my best to stop Bill, but have you ever tried to kick anyone when you're in free fall? "You want to find some proof -- I mean, some more proof -- of your diffusion theory of extra-terrestrial culture." "And have you any idea why I'm going to Jupiter to look for it?" "Well -- not exactly. I suppose you hope to find something on one of the moons." are fifteen known satellites, and their total area is about half that of Earth. Where would you start looking if you had a couple of weeks to spare? I'd rather like to know." Bill glanced doubtfully at the Professor, as if he almost suspected him of sarcasm. "I don't know much about astronomy," he said. "But there are four big moons, aren't there? I'd start on those." "For your information, Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto are each about as big as Africa. Would you work through them in alphabetical order?" "No," Bill replied promptly. "I'd start on the one nearest Jupiter and go outwards." "I don't think we'll waste any more time pursuing your logical processes," sighed the Professor. He was obviously impatient to begin his set speech. "Anyway, you're quite wrong. We're not going to the big moons at all. They've been photographically surveyed from space and large areas have been explored on the surface. They've got nothing of archeological interest. We're going to a place that's never been visited before." "Not to Jupiter!" I gasped. "Heavens, no -- nothing as drastic as that! But we're going nearer to him than anyone else has ever been." He paused thoughtfully. "It's a curious thing, you know -- or you probably don't -- that it's nearly as difficult to travel between Jupiter's satellites as it is to go between the planets, although the distances are so much smaller. This is because Jupiter's got such a terrific gravitational field and his moons are traveling so quickly. The innermost moon's moving almost as fast as Earth and the journey to it from Ganymede costs almost as much fuel as the trip from Earth to Venus, even though it takes only a day and a half. "And it's that journey which we're going to make. No one's ever done it before because nobody could think of any good reason for the expense. Jupiter Five is only eighteen miles, in diameter, so it couldn't possibly be of much interest. Even some of the outer satellites, which are far easier to reach, haven't been visited because it hardly seemed worth while to waste the rocket fuel." "Then why are we going to waste it?" I asked impatiently. The whole thing sounded like a complete wild-goose chase, though so long as it proved interesting, and involved no actual danger, I didn't greatly mind. Perhaps I ought to confess -- though I'm tempted to say nothing, as a good many others have done -- that at this time I didn't believe a word of Professor Forster's theories. Of course, I realized that he field, but I did draw the line at some of his more fantastic ideas. After all, the evidence was so slight and the conclusions so revolutionary that one could hardly help being skeptical. Perhaps you can still remember the astonishment when the first Martian expedition found the remains not of one ancient civilization, but of two. Both had been highly advanced, but both had perago. The reason was unknown (and still is) : it did not seem to be warfare, as the two cultures appear to have lived amicably together. One of the races had been insectlike, the other vaguely reptilian. The insects seem to have been the genuine, original Martians: the reptile-people -- usually referred to as "Culture X" -- had arrived on the scene later. So, at least, Professor Forster maintained. They had certainly possessed the secret of space travel, because the ruins of their peculiar cruciform cities had been found on -- of all places -- Mercury. Forster believed that they had tried to colonize all the smaller planets -- Earth and Venus having been ruled out because of the excessive gravity. It was a source of some disappointment to the Professor that no traces of Culture X had ever been found on the Moon, though he was certain that such a discovery was only a matter of time. The "conventional" theory of Culture X was that it had originally come from one of the smaller planets or satellites, had made peaceful contact with the Martians -- the only other intelligent race in the known history of the System -- and had died out at the same time as Martian civilization. But Professor Forster had more ambitious ideas: he was convinced that Culture X had entered the Solar System from interstellar space. The fact that no one else believed this annoyed him, though not very much, for he is one of those people who is only happy when in a minority. could see Jupiter through the cabin porthole as Professor Forster unfolded his plan. It was a beautiful sight: I could just make out the equatorial cloud belts and three of the satellites were visible as little stars close to the planet. I wondered which was Ganymede, our first port of call. "If Jack will condescend to pay attention," the Professor continued, "HI tell you why we're going such a long way from home. You know that last year I spent a good deal of time poking among the ruins in the twilight belt of Mercury. Perhaps you read the paper I gave on the subject at the London School of Economics. You may even have been there -- I do remember a disturbance at the back of the hall. "What I didn't tell anyone then was that while I was on Mercury I discovered an important clue to the origin of Culture X. I've kept quiet about it, although I've been sorely tempted when fools like Dr. Haughton have tried to be funny at my expense. But I wasn't going to risk letting someone else get here before I could organize this expedition. "One of the things I found on Mercury was a rather well-preserved bas-relief of the Solar System. It's not the first that's been discovered -- as you know astronomical motifs are common in true Martian and Culture X art. But there were certain peculiar symbols against various planets, including Mars and Mercury. I think the pattern had some historic significance, and the most curious thing about it is that little Jupiter Five -- one of the least important of all the satellites -- seemed to have the most attention drawn to it. I'm convinced that there's something on Five which is the key to the whole problem of Culture X, and I'm going there to discover what it is." As far as I can remember now, neither Bill nor I was particularly impressed by the Professor's story. Maybe the people of Culture X had left some artifacts on Five for obscure reasons of their own. It would be interesting to unearth them, but hardly likely that they would be as important as the Professor thought. I guess he was rather disappointed at our lack of enthusiasm: if so it was his fault since, as we discovered later, he was still holding out on us. We landed on Ganymede, the third and largest moon, about a week later. Ganymede is the only one of the satellites with a permanent base on it -- there's an observatory and a geophysical station with a staff of about fifty scientists. They were rather glad to see visitors, but we didn't stay long, as the Professor was anxious to refuel and set off again. The fact that we were heading for Five naturally aroused a good deal of interest but the professor wouldn't talk and we couldn't -- he kept too close an eye on us. Ganymede, by the way, is quite an interesting place and we managed to see rather more of it on the return journey. But as I've promised to write an article for another magazine about that, I'd better not say anything else here. Five took just over a day and a half, and it gave us an uncomfortable feeling to see Jupiter expanding hour by hour until it seemed as if he was going to fill the sky. I don't know much about astronomy, but I couldn't help thinking of the tremendous gravity field we were falling into. All sorts of things could go wrong so easily. If we ran out of fuel we'd never be able to get back to Ganymede, and we might even drop into Jupiter himself. I wish I could describe what it was like seeing that colossal globe, with its raging storm belts spinning in the sky ahead of us. Luckily there have been so many color close-ups of Jupiter published by You might lie to Keep your eyes on the "National Geographic" next spring . now that you're bound to have seen some of them. You may even have seen the one which, as I'll explain later, was the cause of all our trouble. At last Jupiter stopped growing: we'd swung into the orbit of Five and would soon catch up with the tiny moon as it raced around the planet. We were all squeezed in the control room waiting for our first glimpse of our target -- at least, all of us who could get in were doing so. Bill and I were crowded out into the corridor and could only crane over other people's shoulders. Kingsley Searle, our pilot, was in the control seat looking as unruffled as ever: Eric Fulton, the engineer, was thoughtfully chewing his mustache and watching the fuel gauges, and Tony Groves was doing complicated things with his navigation tables. And the Professor appeared to be rigidly attached to the eyepiece of the teleperiscope. Suddenly he gave a start and we heard a whistle of indrawn breath. After a minute, without a word, he beckoned to Searle, who took his place at the eyepiece. Exactly the same thing happened, and then Searle handed over to Fulton. It got a bit monotonous by the time Groves had reacted identically, so we wormed our way in and took over after a bit of opposition. I don't know quite what I'd expected to see, so that's probably why I was disappointed. Hanging there in space was a tiny gibbous moon, its "night" sector lit up faintly by the reflected glory of Jupiter. And that seemed to be all. Then I began to make out additional markings, in the way that you do if you look through a telescope for long enough. There were faint criss-crossing lines on the surface of the satellite, and suddenly my eye grasped their full pattern. For it was a pattern: those lines covered Five with the same geometrical accuracy as the lines of latitude and longitude divide up a globe of the Earth. I suppose I gave my whistle of amazement, for then Bill pushed me out of the way and had his turn to look. The next thing I remember is Professor Forster looking very smug while we bombarded him with questions. "Of course," he explained, "this isn't as much a surprise to me as it is to you. Besides the evidence I'd found on Mercury, there were other clues. I've a friend at the Ganymede Observatory whom I've sworn to secrecy and who's been under quite a strain these last few weeks. It's rather surprising to anyone who's not an astronomer that the Observatory has never bothered much about the satellites. The big instruments are all used on extra-galactic nebulae, and the little ones spend all their time looking at Jupiter. "The only thing the Observatory had ever done to Five was to measure its diameter and take a few photographs. They weren't quite good enough to show the markings we've just observed, otherwise there would have been an investigation before. But my friend Lawton detected them through the hundred centimeter reflector when I asked him to look, and he also noticed something else that should have been spotted before. Five is only eighteen miles in diameter, but it's much brighter than it should be for its size. When you compare its reflecting power -- its aldeb -- its -- " "Its albedo!" "Thanks, Tony -- its albedo with thaf of the other moons, you find that it's a much better reflector than it should be. In fact, it behaves more like polished metal than rock." "So that explains it!" I said. "The people of Culture X must have covered Five with an outer shell -- like the domes they built on Mercury, but on a bigger scale." The Professor looked at me rather pityingly. "So you still haven't guessed!" he said. I don't think this was quite fair. Frankly, would you have done any better in the same circumstances? on an enormous metal plain. As I looked through the portholes, I felt completely dwarfed by my surroundings. An ant crawling on the top of an oil storage tank might have had much the same feelings -- and the looming bulk of Jupiter up there in the sky didn't help. Even the Professor's usual cockiness now seemed to be overlaid by a kind of reverent awe. The plain wasn't quite devoid of features. Running across it in various directions were broad bands where the stupendous metal plates had been joined together. These bands, or the criss-cross pattern they formed, were what we had seen from space. About three hundred yards away was a low hill -- at least, what would have been a hill on a natural world. We had spotted it on our way in after making a careful survey of the little satellite from space. It was one of six such projections, four arranged equidistantly around the equator and the other two at the Poles. The assumption was pretty obvious that they would be entrances to the world below the metal shell. I know that some people think it must be very entertaining to walk around on an airless, low-gravity planet in space-suits. Well, it isn't. There are so many points to think about, so many checks to make and precautions to observe, that the mental strain outweighs the glamour -- at least as far as I'm concerned. But I must admit that this time, as we climbed out of the airlock, I was so excited that for once these things didn't worry me. The gravity of Five was so microscopic that walking was completely out of the question. We were all roped together like mountaineers and blew ourselves across the metal plain with gentle bursts from our recoil pistols. The experienced astronauts, Fulton and Groves, were at the two ends of the chain so that any unwise eagerness on the part of the people in the middle was restrained. It took us only a few minutes to reach our objective, which we discovered to be a broad, low dome at least six hundred yards in circumference. I wondered if it was a gigantic airlock, large enough to permit the entrance of whole spaceships. Unless we were very lucky, we might be unable to find a way in since the controlling mechanisms would no longer be functioning -- and even if they were, we would not know how to operate them. It would be difficult to imagine anything more tantalizing than being locked out, unable to get at the greatest archeological find in all history. We had made a quarter circuit of the dome when we found an opening in the metal shell. It was quite small -- only about seven feet across -- and it was so nearly circular that for a moment we did not realize what it was. Then Tony's voice came over the radio: "That's not artificial. We've got a meteor to thank for it." "Impossible!" protested Professor Forster. "It's much too regular." Tony was stubborn. "Big meteors always produce circular holes, unless they strike very glancing blows. And look at the edges -- you can see there's been an explosion of some kind. Probably the meteor and the shell were vaporized -- we won't find any fragments." "You'd expect this sort of thing to happen," put in Kingsley. "How long has this been here? Five million years? I'm surprised we haven't found any other craters." "Maybe you're right," said the Professor, too pleased to argue. "Anyway, I'm going in first." "Right," said Kingsley, who as captain had the last say in all such matters. "I'll give you seventy feet of rope and will sit in the hole so that we can keep radio contact. Otherwise this shell will blanket your signals." So Professor Forster was the first man to enter Five, as he deserved to be. We crowded close to Kingsley so that he could relay news of the Professor's progress. He didn't get very far. There was another shell just inside the outer one, as we might have expected. The Professor had room to stand upright between them, and as far as his torch could throw its beam he could see avenues of supporting struts and girders, but that was about all. It took us twenty-four exasperating hours before we got any further. Near the end of that time I remember asking the Professor why he hadn't thought of bringing any explosives. He gave me a very hurt look. "There's enough aboard the ship to blow us all to glory," he said. "But I'm not going to risk doing any damage if I can find another way." That's what I call patience, but I could see his point of view. After all, what was another few days in a search that had already taken him twenty years? ple, who found the way in when we had abandoned our first line of approach. Near the North Pole of the little world he discovered a really giant meteor hole -- over a hundred yards across and cutting through both the outer shells surrounding Five. It had revealed still another shell below those, and by one of those chances that must happen if one waits enough aeons, a second, smaller, meteor had come down inside the crater and penetrated the innermost skin. The hole was just big enough to allow entrance for a man in a space-suit. We went through head first, one at a time. I don't suppose I'll ever have a more weird experience than hanging from that tremendous vault, like a spider suspended beneath the dome of St. Peter's. We only knew that the space in which we floated was vast: just how big it was we could not tell, for our torches gave us no sense of distance. In this airless, dustless cavern the beams were, of course, totally invisible and when we shone them on the roof above, we could see the ovals of light dancing away into the distance until they were too diffused to be visible. If we pointed them "downwards" we could see a pale smudge of illumination so far below that it revealed nothing. Very slowly, under the minute gravity of this tiny world, we fell downwards until checked by our safety ropes. Overhead I could see the tiny glimmering patch through which we had entered: it was remote but reassuring. And then, while I was swinging with an infinitely sluggish pendulum motion at the end of my cable, with the lights of my companions glimmering like fitful stars in the darkness around me, the truth suddenly crashed into my brain. Forgetting that we were all on open circuit, I cried out involuntarily: "Professor -- I don't believe this is a planet at all! It's a spaceship!" Then I stopped, feeling that I had made a fool of myself. There was a brief, tense silence, then a babble of noise as everyone else started arguing at once. Professor Forster's voice cut across the confusion and I could tell that he was both pleased and surprised. "You're quite right, Jack. This is the ship that brought Culture X to the Solar System." I heard someone -- it sounded like Eric Fulton -- give a gasp of incredulity. "It's fantastic! A ship eighteen miles across!" "You ought to know better than that," replied the Professor, with surprising mildness. "Suppose a civilization wanted to cross interstellar space -- how else would it attack the problem? It would build a mobile planetoid out in space, taking perhaps centuries over the task. Since the ship would have to be a self-contained world, which could support its inhabitants for generations, it would need to be as large as this. I wonder how many suns they visited before they found ours and knew that their search was ended? They must have had smaller ships that could take them down to the planets, and of course they had to leave the parent vessel somewhere in space. So they parked it here, in a close orbit near the largest planet, where it would remain safely forever -- or until they needed it again. It was the logical place : if they had set it circling the Sun, in time the pulls of the planets would have disturbed its orbit so much that it might have been lost. That could never happen to it here." "Tell me, Professor," someone asked, "did you guess all this before we started?" "I hoped it. All the evidence pointed to this answer. There's always been something anomalous about Satellite Five, though no one seems to have noticed it. Why this single tiny moon so close to Jupiter, when all the other small satellites are seventy times further away? Astronomically speaking, it didn't make sense -- but enough of this chattering. We've got work to do." That, I think, must count as the understatement of the century. There were seven of us, faced with the greatest archeological discovery of all time. Almost a whole world -- a small world, an artificial one, but still a world -- was waiting for us to explore. All we could perform was a swift and superficial reconnaissance: there might be material here for generations of research workers. The first step was to lower a powerful floodlight on a powerline running from the ship. This would act as a beacon and prevent us getting lost, as well as give local illumination on the inner surface of the satellite. (Even now, I still find it hard to call Five a ship.) Then we dropped down the line to the surface below. It was a fall of about a mile, and in this low gravity it was quite safe to make the drop unretarded. The gentle shock of the impact could be absorbed easily enough by the spring-loaded staffs we carried for that purpose. I simply can't remember what I was feeling when we came across the first of the great mushroomcapped entrance shafts. I suppose I was so excited and so overwhelmed by the wonder of it all that I've forgotten everything else. But I can recall the impression of sheer size -- something which mere photographs can never give. The builders of this world, coming as they did from a planet of low gravity, were giants -- about four times as tall as men. We were pigmies crawling among their works. We never got below the outer levels on our first visit, so we met few of the scientific marvels which later expeditions discovered. That was just as well: the residential areas provided enough to keep us busy for several lifetimes. The globe we were exploring must once have been lit by artificial sunlight pouring down from the triple shell that surrounded it and kept its atmosphere from leaking into space. Here on the surface the Jovians (I suppose I cannot avoid adopting the popular name for the peoples of Culture X) had reproduced, as accurately as they could, conditions on the world they had left, unknown ages ago. Perhaps they still had day and night, changing seasons, rain and mist. They had even taken a tiny sea with them into exile. The water was still there, forming a frozen lake two miles across. I hear that there is a plan afoot to electrolize it and provide Five with a breathable atmosphere again, as soon as the meteor holes in the outer shell have been plugged. The more we saw of their work, the more we grew to like and admire the race whose possessions we were disturbing for the first time in giants from another sun, they had much in common with man, and it is a great tragedy that our races missed each other by what is, on the cosmic scale, such a narrow margin. We were, I suppose, more fortunate than any archeologists in history. The vacuum of space had preserved everything from decay and -- this was something which could not have been expected -- the Jovians had not emptied their mighty ship of all its treasures when they had set out to colonize the Solar System. Here on the inner surface of Five everything still seemed intact, as it had been at the end of the ship's long journey. Perhaps the travelers had preserved it as a shrine in memory of their lost home -- or perhaps they had thought that one day they might have to use these things again. Whatever the reason, everything here was as its makers had left it. Sometimes it frightened me. I might be photographing, with Bill's help, some great wall carving when the sheer timelessness of the place would strike into my heart. I would look round nervously, half expecting to see giant shapes come stalking in through the pointed doorways, to continue the tasks that had been momentarily interrupted. lery on the fourth day. That was the only name for it; there was no mistaking its purpose. When Groves and Searle, who had been doing rapid sweeps over the southern hemisphere, reported the discovery we decided to concentrate all our forces there. For, as somebody or other had said, the art of a people reveals its soul, and here we might find the key to Culture X. The building was huge, even by the standards of this giant race. Like all the other structures on Five, it was made of metal, yet there was nothing cold or mechanical about it. The topmost peak climbed half way to the remote roof of the world, and from a distance -- before the details were visible -- the building looked not unlike a Gothic cathedral. Misled by this chance resemblance, some later writers have called it a temple: but we have never found any trace of what might be called a religion among the Jovians. Yet there seems something appropriate about the name "The Temple of Art", and it's stuck so thoroughly that no one can change it now. It has been estimated that there individual exhibits in this single building -- the harvest garnered during the whole history of a race that may have been much older than Man. And it was here that I found a small, circular room which at first sight seemed to be no more than the meeting place of six radiating corridors. I was by myself (and thus, I'm afraid, disobeying the Professor's orders) and taking what I thought would be a shortcut back to my companions. The dark walls were drifting silently past me as I glided along, the light of my torch dancing over the ceiling ahead. It was covered with deeply cut lettering, and I was so busy looking for familiar character groupings that for some time I paid no attention to the chamber's floor. Then I saw the statue and focussed my beam upon it. The moment when one first meets a great work of art has an impact that can never again be recaptured. In this case the subject matter made the effect all the more overwhelming. I was the first man ever to know what the Jovians had looked like, for here, carved with superb skill and authority, was one obviously modeled from the life. The slender, reptilian head was looking straight towards me, the sightless eyes staring into mine. Two of the hands were clasped upon the breast as if in resignation : the other two were holding an instrument whose purpose is still unknown. The long, powerful tail -- which, like a kangaroo's, probably balanced the rest of the body -- was stretched out along the ground, adding to the impression of rest or repose. There was nothing human about the face or the body: there were, for example, no nostrils -- only gilllike openings in the neck. Yet the figure moved me profoundly: the artist had spanned the barriers of time and culture in a way I should never have believed possible. "Not human -- but humane" was the verdict Professor Forster gave. There were many things we could not have shared with the builders of this world, but all that was really important we would have felt in common. Just as one can read emotions in the alien but familiar face of a dog or a horse, so it seemed that I knew the feelings of the being confronting me. Here was wisdom and authority -- the calm, confident power that is shown, for example, in Bellini's famous portrait of the Doge Loredano. Yet there was sadness also -- the sadness of a race which had made some stupendous effort, and made it in vain. We still do not know why this single statue is the only representation the Jovians have ever made of themselves in their art. One would hardly expect to find taboos of this nature among such an advanced race : perhaps we will know the answer when we have deciphered the writing carved on the chamber walls. Yet I am already certain of the statue's purpose. It was set here to bridge time and to greet whatever beings might one day stand in the footsteps of its makers. That, perhaps, is why they shaped it so much smaller than life. Even then they must have guessed that the future belonged to Earth or Venus, and hence to beings whom they would have dwarfed. They knew that size could be a barrier as well as time. A few minutes later I was on my way back to the ship with my companions, eager to tell the Professor about the discovery. He had been reluctantly snatching some rest, though I don't believe he averaged more than four hours sleep a day all the time we were on Five. The golden light of Jupiter was flooding the great metal plain as we emerged through the shell and stood beneath the stars once more. "Hello!" I heard Bill say over the radio, "the Prof's moved the ship." "Nonsense," I retorted. "It's exactly where we left it." Then I turned my head and saw the reason for Bill's mistake. We had visitors. down a couple of miles away, and as far as my non-expert eyes could tell it might have been a duplicate of ours. When we hurried through the airlock, we found that the Professor, a little bleary-eyed, was already entertaining. To our surprise, though not exactly to our displeasure, one of the three visitors was an extremely attractive brunette. "This," said Professor Forster, 'a little wearily, "is Mr. Randolph Mays, the science writer. I imagine you've heard of him. And this is -- " he turned to Mays. "I'm afraid I didn't quite catch the names." "My pilot, Donald Hopkins -- my secretary, Marianne Mitchell." There was just the slightest pause before the word "secretary", but it was long enough to set a little signal light flashing in my brain. I kept my eyebrows from going up, but I caught a glance from Bill that said, without any need for words "If you're thinking what I'm thinking, I'm ashamed of you." Mays was a tall, rather cadaverous man with thinning hair and an attitude of bonhomie which one felt was only skin deep -- the protective coloration of a man who has to be friendly with too many people. "I expect this is as big a surprise to you as it is to me," he said with unnecessary heartiness. "I certainly never expected to find anyone here before me -- and I certainly didn't expect to find all this" "What brought you here?" said Ashton, trying to sound not too suspiciously inquisitive. "I was just explaining that to the Professor. Can I have that folder please, Marianne? Thanks." He drew out a series of very fine astronomical paintings and passed them round. They showed the planets from their satellites -- a common enough subject, of course. "You've all seen this sort of thing before," Mays continued. "But there's a difference here. These pictures are nearly a hundred years, old: they were painted by an artist named Chesley Bonestell and appeared in Life back in # -- long before space travel began, of course. Now what's happened is that Life has commissioned me to go round the Solar System and see how well I can match these imaginative paintings against the reality. In the centenary issue, they'll be published side by side with photographs of the real thing. Good idea, eh?" I had to admit that it was. But it was going to make matters rather complicated, and I wondered wha the Professor thought about it. Then I glanced again at Miss Mitchell, standing demurely in the corner, and decided that there would be compensations. In any other circumstances, we would have been glad to meet another party of explorers, but here there was the question of priority to be considered. Mays would certainly be hurrying back to Earth as quickly as he could, his original mission abandoned, and all his films used up here and now. It was difficult to see how we could stop him, and not even certain that we desired to do so. We wanted all the publicity and support we could get -- but we would prefer to do things in our own time, after our own fashion. I wondered how strong the Professor was on tact, and feared the worst. Yet, at first, diplomatic relations were smooth enough. The Professor had hit on the bright idea of pairing each of us with one of Mays' team, so that we acted simultaneously as guides and supervisors. Doubling the number of investigating groups also greatly increased the rate at which we could work. It was unsafe for anyone to operate by himself under these conditions, and this had handicapped us a good deal. The Professor outlined his policy to us the day after the arrival of Mays' party. "I hope we can get along together," he said a little anxiously. "As far as I'm concerned they can go where they like and photograph what they like -- as long as they don't take anything, and as long as they don't get back to Earth with their records before we do." "I don't see how we can stop them," protested Ashton. "Well, I hadn't intended to do this, but I've now registered a claim to Five. I radioed it to Ganymede last night, and it will be at The Hague by now." "But no one can claim an astronomical body for himself. That was settled in the case of the Moon, back in the last century." The Professor gave a rather crooked smile. "I'm not annexing an astronomical body , remember. I've put in a claim for salvage, and I've done it in the name of the World Science Organization. If Mays takes anything out of Five, he'll be stealing it from them. Tomorrow I'm going to explain the situation gently to him, just in case he gets any bright ideas." It certainly seemed peculiar to think of Satellite Five as salvage, and I could imagine some pretty legal quarrels developing when we got home. But for the present the Professor's move should have given us some safeguards and might discourage Mays from collecting souvenirs -- so we were optimistic enough to hope. izing, but I managed to get paired off with Marianne for several trips round the interior of Five. Mays didn't seem to mind : there was no particular reason why he should. A space-suit is the most perfect chaperon ever devised, confound it! Naturally enough, I took her to the art gallery at the first opportunity, and showed her my find. She stood looking at the statue for a long time while I held my torch beam upon it. "It's very wonderful," she breathed at last. "Just think of it -- waiting here in the darkness all have to give it a name." "I have. I've christened it 'The Ambassador'." "Why?" "Well, because I think it's a kind of envoy, if you like, carrying a greeting to us. The people who made it knew that one day someone else was bound to come here and find this place." "I think you're right. 'The Ambassador -- yes, that was clever of you. There's something noble about it -- and something very sad, too. Don't you feel it?" I could tell that Marianne was a veij intelligent woman : it was quite remarkable the way she saw my point of view, and the interest she took in everything I showed her. But The Ambassador fascinated her most of all, and she kept on coming back to it. "You know, Jack," she said (I think this was sometime the next day, when Mays had been to see it as well) "you must take that statue back to Earth. Think of the sensation it would cause." I sighed. "The Professor would like to, but it must weigh a ton. We can't afford the fuel. It will have to wait for a later trip." She looked puzzled. "But things hardly weigh anything here," she protested. "That's different," I explained. "There's weight, and there's inertia -- two quite different things. Now inertia -- oh, never mind. We can't take it back, anyway. Captain Searle's told us that, definitely." "What a pity," said Marianne. I forgot all about this conversation until the night before we left. We had had a busy and exhausting day packing our equipment (a good deal, of course, we left behind for future use). All our photographic material had been used up: as Charlie Ashton remarked, if we met a live Jovian now we'd be unable to record the fact. I think we all wanted a breathing space, an opportunity to relax and sort out our impressions and to recover from our head-on collision with an alien culture. Mays' ship, the Henry Luce , was also nearly ready for take-off. We would leave at the same time, an arrangement which suited the Professor admirably as he did not trust Mays alone on Five. Everything had been settled when, while checking through our records, I suddenly found that six rolls of exposed film were missing. They were photographs of a complete set of transcriptions in the Temple of Art. After a certain amount of thought I recalled that they had been entrusted to my charge, and I had put them very carefully on a ledge in the Temple, intending to collect them later. It was a long time before takeoff, the Professor and Ashton were canceling some arrears of sleep, and there seemed no reason why I should not slip back to collect the missing material. I knew there would be a row if it was left behind, and as I remembered exactly where it was I need be gone only thirty minutes. So I went, explaining my mission to Bill just in case of accidents. The floodlight was no longer working, of course, and the darkness inside the shell of Five was somewhat oppressive. But I left a portable beacon at the entrance, and dropped freely until my handtorch told me it .was time to break the fall. Ten minutes later, with a sigh of relief, I gathered up the missing films. It was a natural enough thing to pay my last respects to The Ambassador: it might be years before I saw him again, and that calmly enigmatic figure had begun to exercise an extraordinary fascination over me. Unfortunately, that fascination had not been confined to me alone. For the chamber was empty and the statue gone. I suppose I could have crept back and said nothing, thus avoiding awkward explanations. But I was too furious to think of discretion, and as soon as I returned we woke the Professor and told him what had happened. He sat on his bunk rubbing the sleep out of his eyes, then uttered a few harsh words about Mr. Mays and his companions which it would do no good at all to repeat here. "What I don't understand," said Searle "is how they got the thing out -- if they have, in fact. We should have spotted it." "There are plenty of hiding places -- and they could have waited until there was no one around before they took it up through the hull. It must have been quite a job, even under this gravity," remarked Eric Fulton, in tones of admiration. "There's no time for postmortems," said the Professor savagely. "We've got five hours to think of something. They can't take off before then, because we're only just past opposition with Ganymede. That's correct, isn't it Kingsley?" Searle nodded agreement. "Yes. We must move round to the other side of Jupiter before we can enter a transfer orbit -- at least, a reasonably economical one." "Good. That gives us a breathing space. Well -- has anyone any ideas?" Looking back on the whole thing now, it often seems to me that our subsequent behavior was, shall I say, a little peculiar and slightly uncivilized. It was not the sort of thing we could have imagined ourselves doing a few months before. But we were annoyed and overwrought, and our remoteness from all other human beings somehow made everything seem different. Since there was no other law here, we had to make it. "Can't we do something to stop them taking off? Could we sabotage their rockets, for instance?" asked Bill. Searle didn't like this idea at all. "We mustn't do anything drastic," he said. "Besides, Don Hopkins is a good friend of mine. He'd never forgive me if I damaged his ship. There'd be the danger, too, that we might do something that couldn't be repaired." "Then pinch their fuel," said Groves laconically. "Of course! They're probably all asleep -- there's no light in the cabin. All we've got to do is to connect up and pump." "A very nice idea," I pointed out "but we're nearly two miles apart. How much pipeline have we got?" The others ignored this interruption as if it was beneath contempt and went on making their plans. Five minutes later the technicians had settled everything: we only had to climb into our space-suits and do the work. the Professor's expedition, that I should end up like an African porter in one of those old adventure stories, carrying a load on my head. Especially when that load was a sixth of a spaceship (being so short, Professor Forster wasn't able to provide very effective help.) Now that its fuel tanks were half empty, the weight of the ship, in this gravity, was about # pounds. We all squeezed underneath, heaved, and up she went -- very slowly, of course, because her inertia was still unchanged. Then we started marching. It took us quite a while to make the journey, and it wasn't as easy as we'd thought it would be. But presently the two ships were lying side by side, and nobody had noticed us. Everyone in the Henry Luce was fast asleep, as they had every reason to expect us to be. Though I was still rather short of breath, I found a certain schoolboy amusement in the whole adventure as Searle and Fulton drew the refueling pipeline out of our airlock and quietly coupled up to the other ship. "The beauty of this plan," explained Groves to me as we stood watching, "is that they can't do anything to stop us, unless they come outside and uncouple our line. We can drain them dry in five minutes -- and it will take them half that time to wake up and get into their space-suits." A sudden horrid fear smote me. "Suppose they turned on their rockets and tried to get away?" "Then we'd both be smashed up. No -- they'll just have to come outside and see what's going on. Ah, there go the pumps." The pipeline had stiffened like a fire-hose under pressure, and I knew that the fuel was pouring into our tanks. Any moment now the lights would go on in the Henry Luce and her startled occupants would come scuttling out. It was something of an anticlimax when they didn't. They must have been sleeping very soundly not to have felt the vibration from the pumps, but when it was all over nothing had happened and we just stood round looking rather foolish. Searle and Fulton carefully uncoupled the pipeline and put it back into the airlock. "Well?" we asked the Professor. He thought things over for a minute. "Let's get back into the ship," he said. When we had climbed out of our suits and were gathered together in the control room, or as far in as we could get, the Professor sat down at the radio and punched out the Emergency signal. Our sleeping neighbors would be awake in a couple of seconds as their automatic receiver sounded the alarm. The TV screen glimmered into life. There, looking rather frightened, was Randolph Mays. "Hello, Forster," he snapped. "What's the trouble?" "Nothing wrong here," replied the Professor in his best dead-pan manner, "but you've lost something important. Look at your fuel gauges." The screen emptied, and for a moment there was a confused mumbling and shouting from the speaker. Then Mays was back, annoyance and alarm competing for possession of his features. "What's going on?" he demanded angrily. "Do you know anything about this?" The Prof, let him sizzle for a moment before he replied. "I think you'd better come across and talk things over," he said. "You won't have far to walk." Mays glared back at him uncertainly, then retorted "You bet I will!" The screen went blank. "He'll have to climb down now!" said Bill gleefully. "There's nothing else he can do!" "It's not so simple as you think," warned Fulton. "If he really wanted to be awkward, he could just sit tight and radio Ganymede for a tanker." "What good would that do him? It would waste days and cost a fortune." "Yes, but he'd still have the statue, if he wanted it that badly. And he'd get his money back when he sued us." The airlock light flashed on and Mays stumped into the room. He was in a surprisingly conciliatory mood: on the way over, he must have had second thoughts. "Well, well," he said affably. "What's all this nonsense in aid of?" "You know perfectly well," the Professor retorted coldly. "I made it quite clear that nothing was to be taken off Five. You've been stealing property that doesn't belong to you." "Now let's be reasonable. Who does it belong to? You can't claim everything on this planet as your personal property." "This is not a planet -- it's a ship and the laws of salvage operate." "Frankly, that's a very debatable point. Don't you think you should wait until you get a ruling from the lawyers?" The Professor was being icily polite, but I could see that the strain was terrific and an explosion might occur any moment. "Listen, Mr. Mays," he said with ominous calm. "What you've taken is the most important single find we've made here. I will make allowances for the fact that you don't appreciate what you've done, and don't understand the viewpoint of an archeologist like myself. Return that statue, and we'll pump your fuel back and say no more." Mays rubbed his chin thoughtfully. "I really don't see why you should make such a fuss about one statue, when you consider all the stuff that's still here." It was then that the Professor made one of his rare mistakes. "You talk like a man who's stolen the Mona Lisa from the Louvre and argues that nobody will miss it because of all the other paintings. This statue's unique in a way that no terrestrial work of art can ever be. That's why I'm determined to get it back." You should never, when you're bargaining, make it obvious that you want something really badly. I saw the greedy glint in Mays' eye and said to myself "Uh-huh! He's going to be tough." And I remembered Fulton's remark about calling Ganymede for a tanker. "Give me half an hour to think it over," said Mays, turning to the airlock. "Very well," replied the Professor stiffly. "Half an hour -- no more." I must give Mays credit for brains. Within five minutes we saw his communications aerial start slewing round until it locked on Ganymede. Naturally we tiied to listen in, but he had a scrambler. These newspaper men must trust each other. The reply came back a few minutes later : that was scrambled, too. While we were waiting for the next development, we had another council of war. The Professor was now entering the stubborn, stop-atnothing stage : he realized he'd miscalculated and that had made him fighting mad. I think Mays must have been a little apprehensive, because he had reinforcements when he returned. Donald Hopkins, his pilot, came with him, looking rather uncomfortable. "I've been able to fix things up, Professor," he said smugly. "It will take me a little longer, but I can get back without your help if I have to. Still, I must admit that it will save a good deal of time and money if we can come to an agreement. I'll tell you what. Give me back my fuel and I'll return the other -- er -- souvenirs I've collected. But I insist on keeping Mona Lisa, even if it means I won't get back to Ganymede until the middle of next week." The Professor then uttered a number of what are usually called deep-space oaths, though I can assure you they're much the same as any other oaths. That seemed to relieve his feelings a lot and he became fiendishly friendly. "My dear Mr. Mays," he said, "you're an unmitigated crook, and accordingly I've no compunction left in dealing with you. I'm prepared to use force, knowing that the law will justify me." Mays looked slightly alarmed, though not unduly so. We had moved to strategic positions round the door. "Please don't be melodramatic," he said haughtily. "I must ask you," the Professor continued, "to consider yourself under detention while we decide what is to be done. Mr. Searle, take him to Cabin B." Mays sidled along the wall with a nervous laugh. "Really, Professor, this is too childish! You can't detain me against my will." He glanced for support at the captain of the Henry Luce . Donald Hopkins dusted an imaginary speck of fluff from his uniform. "I refuse," he remarked for the benefit of all concerned, "to get involved in vulgar brawls." Mays gave him a venomous look and capitulated with bad grace. We saw that he had a good supply of reading matter, and locked him in. When he was out of the way, the Professor turned to Hopkins, who was looking enviously at our fuel gauges. "Can I take it, Captain," he said politely, "that you don't wish to get mixed up in any of your employer's dirty business?" "I'm neutral. My job is to fly the ship here and take her home. You can fight this out among yourselves." "Thank you: I think we understand each other perfectly. Perhaps it would be best if you returned to your ship and explained the situation. We'll be calling you in a few minutes." Captain Hopkins made his way languidly to the door. As he was about to leave he turned to Searle. "By the way, Kingsley," he drawled. "Have you thought of torture? Do call me if you get round to it -- I've some jolly interesting ideas." Then he was gone, leaving us with our hostage. he could do a direct exchange. If so, he had not bargained on Marianne's stubbornness. "It serves Randolph right," she said. "But I don't really see that it makes any difference. He'll be just as comfortable in your ship as in ours, and you can't do anything to him. Let me know when you're fed up with having him around." It seemed a complete impasse. We had been too clever by half, and it had got us exactly nowhere. We'd captured Mays, but he wasn't any use to us. The Professor was standing with his back to us, staring morosely out of the window. Seemingly balanced on the horizon, the immense bulk of Jupiter nearly filled the sky. "We've got to convince her that we really do mean business," he said. Then he turned abruptly to me. "Do you think she's actually fond of this blackguard?" "Er -- I shouldn't be surprised. Yes, I really believe so." The Professor looked very thoughtful. Then he said to Searle : "Come into my room. I want to talk something over." They were gone quite a while. When they returned, they both had an indefinable air of gleeful anticipation, and the Professor was carrying a piece of paper covered with figures. He went to the radio and called the Henry Luce . "Hello," said Marianne, replying so promptly that she'd obviously been waiting for us. "Have you decided to call it off? I'm getting so bored." The Professor looked at her gravely. "Miss Mitchell," he replied. "It's apparent that you have not been taking us seriously. I'm therefore arranging a somewhat -- er -- drastic little demonstration for your benefit. I'm going to place your employer in a position from which he'll be only too anxious for you to retrieve him as quickly as possible." "Indeed?" replied Marianne non-committally -- though I thought I could detect a trace of apprehension in her voice. "I don't suppose," continued the Professor smoothly, "that you know anything about celestial mechanics... No? Too bad, but your pilot will confirm everything I tell you. Won't you, Hopkins?" "Go ahead," came a painstakingly neutral voice from the background. "Then listen carefully, Miss Mitchell. I want to remind you of our curious -- indeed our precarious -- position on this satellite. You've only got to look out of the window to see how close to Jupiter we are, and I need hardly remind you that Jupiter has by far the most intense gravitational field of all the planets. You follow me?" "Yes," replied Marianne, no longer quite so self-possessed. "Go on." "Very well. This little world of ours goes round Jupiter in almost exactly twelve hours. Now there's a well-known theorem stating that if a body falls from an orbit to the center of attraction, it will take point one seven seven of a period to make the drop. In other words, anything falling from here to Jupiter would reach the centre of the planet in about two hours seven minutes. I'm sure Captain Hopkins can confirm this." There was a long pause. Then we heard Hopkins say: "Well, of course I can't confirm the exact figures, but they're probably correct. It would be something like that, anyway." "Good," continued the Professor. "Now I'm sure you realize," he went on with a hearty chuckle, "that a fall to the center of the planet is a very theoretical case. If anything really was dropped from here, it would reach the upper atmosphere of Jupiter in a considerably shorter time. I hope I'm not boring you?" "No," said Marianne, rather faintly. "I'm so glad to hear it. Anyway, Captain Searle has worked out the actual time for me, and it's one hour thirty five minutes -- with a #  Mays found himself ascending helplessly toward the ominous bulk of Jupiter . few minutes either way. We can't guarantee complete accuracy, ha, ha! "Now it has doubtlessly not escaped your notice that this satellite of ours has an extremely weak gravitational field. Its escape velocity is only about thirty-five feet a second, and anything thrown away from it at that speed would never come back. Correct, Mr. Hopkins?" "Perfectly correct." "Then, if I may come to the point, we propose to take Mr. Mays for a walk until he's immediately under Jupiter, remove the reaction pistols from his suit, and -- ah -- launch him forth. We will be prepared to retrieve him with our ship as soon as you've handed over the property you've stolen. After what I've told you, I'm sure you'll appreciate that time will be rather vital. An hour and thirty-five minutes is remarkably short, isn't it?" "Professor!" I gasped. "You can't possibly do this." "Shut up!" he barked. "Well, Miss Mitchell, what about it?" Marianne was staring at him with mingled horror and disbelief. "You're simply bluffing," she cried. "I don't believe you'd do anything of the kind! Your crew won't let you!" The Professor sighed. "Too bad," he said. "Captain Searle -- Mr. Groves -- will you take the prisoner and proceed as instructed." "Aye-aye, sir," replied Searle with great solemnity. Mays looked frightened but stubborn. "What are you going to do now?" he said, as his suit was handed back to him. Searle unholstered his reaction pistols. "Just climb in," he said. "We're going for a walk." I realized then what the Professor hoped to do. The whole thing was a colossal bluff: of course he wouldn't really have Mays thrown into Jupiter -- and in any case Searle and Groves wouldn't do it. Surely Marianne would see through the bluff and then we'd be left looking mighty foolish. Mays couldn't run away: without his reaction pistols he was quite helpless. Grasping his arms and towing him along like a captive balloon, his escorts set off towards the horizon -- and towards Jupiter. I could see, looking across the space to the other ship, that Marianne was staring out through the observation windows at the departing trio. Professor Forster noticed it too. "I hope you're convinced, Miss Mitchell, that my men aren't carrying along an empty space-suit. Might I suggest that you follow the proceedings with a telescope? They'll be over the horizon in a minute, but you'll be able to see Mr. Mays when he starts to -- er -- ascend." There was a stubborn silence from the loudspeaker. The period of suspense seemed to last for a very long time. Was Marianne waiting to see how far the Professor really would go? By this time I had got hold of a pair of binoculars and was sweeping the sky beyond the ridiculously close horizon. Suddenly I saw it -- a tiny flare of light against the vast yellow back-cloth of Jupiter. I focussed quickly, and could just make out the three figures rising into space. As I watched, they separated : two of them decelerated with their pistols and started to fall back towards Five. The other went on ascending helplessly towards the ominous bulk of Jupiter. I turned on the Professor in horror and disbelief. "They've really done it!" I cried. "I thought you were only bluffing!" "So did Miss Mitchell, I've no doubt," said the Professor calmly, for the benefit of the listening microphone. "I hope I don't need to impress upon you the urgency of the situation. As I've remarked once or twice before, the time of fall from our orbit to Jupiter's surface is ninety-five minutes. But, of course, if one waited even half that time, it would be much too late..." He let that sink in. There was no reply from the other ship. "And now," he continued, "I'm going to switch off our receiver so we can't have any more arguments. We'll wait until you've unloaded that statue -- and the other items Mr. Mays was careless enough to mention -- before we'll talk to you again. Good-bye." minutes. I'd lost track of Mays, and was seriously wondering if we'd better overpower the Professor and go after him before we had a murder on our hands. But the people who could fly the ship were the ones who had actually carried out the crime. I didn't know what to think. Then the airlock of the Henry Luce slowly opened. A couple of space-suited figures emerged, floating the cause of all the trouble between them. "Unconditional surrender," murmured the Professor with a sigh of satisfaction. "Get it into our ship," he called over the radio, "I'll open up the airlock for you." He seemed in no hurry at all. I kept looking anxiously at the clock -- fifteen minutes had already gone by. Presently there was a clanking and banging in the airlock, the inner door opened, and Captain Hopkins entered. He was followed by Marianne, who only needed a bloodstained axe to make her look like Glytaemnestra. I did my best to avoid her eye, but the Professor seemed to be quite without shame. He walked into the airlock, checked that his property was back, and emerged rubbing his hands. "Well, that's that," he said cheerfully. "Now let's sit down and have a drink to forget all this unpleasantness, shall we?" I pointed indignantly at the clock. "Have you gone crazy!" I yelled. "He's already half-way to Jupiter!" Professor Forster looked at me disapprovingly. "Impatience," he said, "is a common failing in the young. I see no cause at all for hasty action." Marianne spoke for the first time : she now looked really scared. "But you promised," she whispered. The Professor suddenly capitulated. He had had his little joke, and didn't want to prolong the agony. "I can tell you at once, Miss Mitchell -- and you too. Jack -- that Mays is in no more danger than we are. We can go and collect him whenever we like." "Do you mean that you lied to me?" "Certainly not. Everything I told you was perfectly true. You simply jumped to the wrong conclusions. When I said that a body would take ninety-five minutes to fall from here to Jupiter, I omitted -- not, I must confess, accidentally -- a rather important phrase. I should have added "a body at rest with respect to Jupiter ." Your friend Mr. Mays was sharing the orbital speed of this satellite -- and he's still got it. A little matter of sixteen miles a second, Miss Mitchell. "Oh yes, we threw him completely off Five and towards Jupiter. But the velocity we gave him then was trivial. He's still moving in practically the same orbit as before. The most he can do -- I've got Captain Searle to work out the figures -- is to drift about sixty miles inward. And 'in one revolution -- twelve hours -- he'll be right back where he started, without us bothering to do anything at all." There was a long, long silence. Marianne's face was a study in frustration, relief, and annoyance at having been fooled. Then she turned on Captain Hopkins. "You must have known all the time! Why didn't you tell me?" Hopkins gave her a wounded expression. "You didn't ask me," he said. an hour later. He was only fifteen miles up, and we located him quickly enough by the flashing light on his suit. His radio had been disconnected, for a reason that hadn't occurred to me. He was intelligent enough to realize that he was in no danger, and if his set had been working he could have called his ship and exposed our bluff. That is, if he wanted to. Personally, I think I'd have been glad enough to call the whole thing off even if I had known that I was perfectly safe. It must have been awfully lonely up there. To my great surprise, Mays wasn't as mad as I'd expected. Perhaps he was too relieved to be back in our snug little cabin when we drifted up to him on the merest fizzle of rockets and yanked him in. Or perhaps he felt that he'd been worsted in fair fight and didn't bear any grudge. There isn't much more to tell -- except that we did play one other trick on him before we left Five. He had a good deal more fuel in his tanks than he really needed, noW that his payload was substantially reduced. By keeping the excess ourselves, we were able to carry the Ambassador back to Ganymede after all. Oh, yes, the Professor gave him a check for the fuel we'd borrowed. Everything was perfectly legal. There's one amusing sequel I must tell you, though. The day after the new gallery was opened at the British Museum I went along to see The Ambassador, partly to discover if his impact was still as great in these changed surround( Continued on page #) Mary might have learned a more ladylike trade , but one thing is certain: she had a shining faith in that space guy from Earth. Now, about that cake she baked... she knew he was coming By Kris Neville Illustrated by Ed Emsh low across the green dust of the Martian desert, its last rays sparkling on the far mountain tops. One by one, lights flickered on in the city. Mary must be expecting that Earthman," Anne said. She held her glastic blouse tight together over her breasts and leaned a little out of the window. Milly nodded. "The Azmuth landed this morning." The noises of commerce were fading. From the window Anne saw the neon blaze up over the door. For the thousandth time she blinked between the equivocal false, filtered up from the tea bars along the street. She looked westward, toward the spaceport, and made out the shadowy nose of the berthed space liner looming against the night. She could picture the scene -- a thousand stevedores unloading cargo, refill men and native spacewriters scurrying over the sleek hull, the Earth voyageurs shouting orders and curses. "Maybe he isn't even on it." Anne turned from the window. She crossed to the couch and sat down, fluffing out the green crinkly glass of her skirt; pendant, multicolored birds flashed from the rings in her ears. She tucked rosy feet under her scented body. "I don't like Earthmen," she said. "They spend money." "They make me sick," Anne said. "With their pale skins and ugly eyes and hairy bodies." "They have strong arms." Anne's wide, red mouth curled in distaste. "They're like a bunch of kids." The room was lighted by soft, overhead fire. Heavy drapes hung from the walls. Sweet, spicy incense curled bluely from the burners by the window. Before the mirror, Milly edged in the narrow line of her pink eyebrows with a pencil. She folded her lips in, rubbing them together, licked them, making them a glistening red. She pinched her cheeks. "I wonder when they'll catch Crescent?" she said. Anne yawned languorously. "It won't be long." "I wouldn't want to be in her shoes," Milly said. Anne patted her mouth lazily. "She ought to have known she couldn't run away." "What do you think Miss Bestris will do to her?" Anne stood up, brushing out the wrinkles in her dress. "I should care." "But what will she do?" Anne shrugged. "Whip her, maybe. How should I know?" "Don't you feel you'd like to run away, once in a while?" Milly asked, turning to look at the other girl. Anne laughed coldly. "I've got better sense." "But don't you want to?" Anne tossed her purple hair. "Where is there to go? Who is there to go to?" "Yes... I guess you're right." Milly turned back to her reflection. Buzzzzzz... Both girls turned their heads to the buttons on the wall. The white one was glowing. "It's Miss Bestris." "We'd better go," Milly said. Together they walked down the heavily carpeted stairs to the sitting room. The Madame was waiting. She was a large woman, rolling in creases of fat, and her pink hair was rough and clipped short. She had a pair of dimples in her cheeks and a single gold band around her right wrist. She was leaning against the piano. "Hurry now, girls, hurry right along," she said. More girls were entering the room; they spread out, sitting on the chairs, curling at the Madame's feet. Their eyes -- amethyst, gray or golden -- were on her face. Many had pink hair, others had tresses of purple or salmon. "Now, girls, I suppose you know there's an Earth ship in port?" The girls nodded. "So I expect we'll have visitors tonight. I want you to all look your very best." She smiled at them. "Anne, why don't you wear that low-cut, orange plastic with the spangles, and June, you the prim white one? You look like an angel in it." June smiled. "And Mary... ?" "Yes, Miss Bestris?" "Mary. Did you buy that neonylon I told you about?" "No, Miss Bestris." "Mary, Mary, Mary. I just don't understand you at all." "I'm saving my money, Miss Bestris," Mary said intently. "Yes, dear, I know that. We're all saving our money. But we simply must look presentable. We have a reputation to hold up." "Yes, Miss Bestris." "Then, Mary, dear, d# -- do, please , buy yourself something decent." "Yes, Miss Bestris. I will... Tomorrow. Tomorrow morning, if I..." "Child? If you what?" "Nothing, Miss Bestris." "Well. See that you get it tomorrow. If you don't, I'm afraid I'll have to take some of your money and get it for you." Mary looked down at the floor. The flaming glow of the hydrojet torches cast golden lights in her softly purple hair. "By the way, Mary. Is that your cake in the oven?" "Yes, Miss Bestris." The other girls snickered. "Let her alone," said the Madame. "If she wants to bake a cake, why shouldn't she?" No one answered. Miss Bestris went on around the room, discussing the girls' clothing, brushing this girl's hair, pinching that girl's cheek, chucking this one under the chin, smiling, frowning. Then finally she stepped back and nodded. "You all look quite good, I think. I can be proud of you. And now, I want you all to go to your rooms and make them extra attractive, and then try to get a little rest, so you'll all be especially beautiful when the boys come. Run along now." The girls filed out, and night continued to settle. After a while, her cigarette glowing in the gloom, the Madame waddled to her office. There three people were waiting for her. nesslike, masculine; no lace, no ribbons, no perfume, only the crisp smell of new paper, the tangy odor of ink, the sweet smell of eraser fluid. When she came in the door the three people stood up. She waved her cigarette hand with a once delicate gesture and flame light glinted dully on the gold band. "Please don't get up for me," she said, but her tone was condescending and the three visitors sat down respectfully. Miss Bestris crossed to her desk; she perched on a comer of it, leaned back, blew smoke. "You wanted to see me about your girls?" Two of the people, man and wife, looked at each other. "Yes," they said. And the other man said, "Yes." "Did you bring any pictures?" They handed her pictures, and she held them up to the overhead torch. She studied them critically, pursing and unpursing her lips in secret calculation. "This one," she said finally, holding out one of the pictures. The man and wife rustled their clothing; they smiled faintly proud at each other. The other man got up slowly, retrieved his picture, left the room without saying a word. "We can't do for little Lavada," the woman whined. "She was a late child, and we're getting old, and we thought she would be better here. It's hard to do for a growing girl when you get old. And my husband can't keep steady work, because of his health and..." "I'm sure she will be happy here," the Madame said, smiling. "Yes," the man agreed. "It's for the best. But -- you know -- well, we hate to do it. "How old is she?'... Fourteen." Miss Bestris studied the picture again. "She doesn't look over twelve." "She's fourteen." "And healthy -- " "We have doctors to see to that," the Madame said. "How much did you have in mind?" "Well," the man said, "it's been a month now since I worked, and with debts and everything... "And something to put aside for winter," his wife added. "We couldn't take less than a "And we wouldn't even think of it, but we don't have a scrap of bread in the house." "And all our bills, and winter coming on..." Miss Bestris turned the picture this way and that. The parents waited. The woman cleared her throat. The man shuffled his feet. The clock on the wall went ticktick, tick-tick. "I'll give you eight hundred and thirty dordocs" the Madame said. "Well..." Miss Bestris bent forward, holding out the picture. "Here, then. Take it. I wouldn't offer that, but I need a girl right now. One of mine ran away last week, and I'm afraid she won't be able to work for a month or so after they bring her back. I'm being generous. Eight hundred and thirty, or take your picture and don't waste my time." The man and woman stared at her. And the clock went tick-tick . "Take it. Chav."... All right," the man said. "We need the money." Miss Bestris leaned across the desk, pressed a button on her panel. Almost immediately, a door slid silently open and her lawyer entered with a white, printed, standard-form sales contract in his hand. Efficiently and rapidly, he entered the particulars. "Sign here," he said, and the parents signed. "Now," said the Madame, "if you'll bring in Lavada tomorrow at nine, I'll arrange for a doctor to be here. If his examination is satisfactory, the money will be ready." The lawyer left, and the woman said, "You understand, we wouldn't do this but for..." "I understand, perfectly," Miss Bestris said. "You don't need to worry. This is the best kind of house -- Earthmen only, you know, and they're very particular. My girls are given the best of care. I'm like a mother to them, and if they are thrifty and diligent, they'll be able to save enough money in a -- a very short time to redeem their contract as provided by law. You needn't worry at all." "Well," the woman said, "I feel better after talking to you. I feel better about the whole thing to hear you talk like that." The clock went tick-tick . "Uh," the man said, "you won't -- ? That is, our little daughter is sometimes wilful and... uh... well... Sometimes." Miss Bestris smiled. "We know how to handle girls." "You'll treat her... ?" "As I would my own child," Miss Bestris said; she took out another cigarette, lit it. "I think we'll call her -- well -- Poppy. Earthmen like to feel at home, you know." The clock went tick-tick . "Well, uh," the man said. "Uh. Thank you." Mary sat before the dressing table with her back to the mirror, while June and Adele occupied the two overstuffed chairs. Night sounds drifted up from the yellow canal, and fresh flower scents whispered on the warm air. The diaphanous glass curtains rustled at the open window. "They're too expensive," Mary said. "I'm sure Miss Bestris overcharges us for them." "Hush," said June, glancing around at the walls nervously. "Hush, Mary." She smoothed at the delicate, plutolac lace fringe above her breasts. "Imported material like this costs money. You can't get it for nothing, and we have to have the best." "I still think she charges too much." Adele shrugged delicately and crossed shapely ankles. "I think Miss Bestris must like you, or she wouldn't let you wear that dress again tonight. You ought to watch out that you don't get on the wrong side of her." Mary laughed, her amethyst eyes sparkling. "I won't care. Not after tonight." "You're not going to run away?" June asked breathlessly. "You wouldn't dare do that. You'd catch it, sure!" Mary shook her head. "Not run away." Adele leaned forward and said huskily, "You got enough money to redeem your contract?" Again Mary shook her head. "No. It's nine hundred and ten dordocs. I have only ninety-three. But I'll have enough in the morning!" She stood up and crossed to the window, looked out toward the spaceport. "How?" "Tell us, Mary!" "Tell you what?" Anne asked, coming into the room. Languidly she drew the door closed behind her and rested against it. "Tell you what?" she insisted, narrowing milky eyes. "Mary says she can redeem her contract tomorrow." Anne's wide mouth curled contemptuously. "Nonsense!" "It's not," said Mary without turning; Anne glided sensuously across the room to the bed, her tight fitting plastic rippling with her tigerish muscles. She sat down. "He said he'd take me away, this trip," Mary continued. "He'll sign off, and then we'll both get a ship and go to one of the frontier planets. Where it won't matter about -- all this." Anne laughed harshly. "My God! You believe that?" "We've both been saving our money," Mary said dreamily. "He's in love with me. He said so." "Honey, that's what they all say." Smiling, Mary turned from the window and leaned backward, stretching. "You don't know him. He's different." "They're all the same," Anne said, her mouth twisting bitterly. "They're just alike. Don't believe any of them." And Mary said, "With him, it's different. You'll see." After a moment, Anne said, "That Earthman? That what's-hisname?" Mary nodded, and Anne brushed an imaginary something off her knee. "An Earthman," Anne said. "They're the worst of all." "You don't know him, or you wouldn't say that." Adele looked away from Anne. "You love him, don't you, Mary?" "Yes." "You're a fool," Anne said. "Listen to me. Love a man? God! You'll see. After him, there'll be another and another, and -- just like Rosy -- you'll watch 'em leave you and laugh at you until finally you're hurt so bad you don't think you can stand being hurt any more, and then along comes another one, and it starts all over again, and then one night you take a razor blade and go to the sink and stick out your throat and..." "No! No! You're wrong! He's not like the rest!" Anne leaned back carelessly, resting, propped on one hand. "See. You know I'm right, already." "You're not!" Anne shrugged. "Honey, tell me that tomorrow night." "I better go take my cake oqt," Mary said. She fled the room in a swirl of shimmering glastic. Anne sneered, "I don't see why Miss Bestris puts up with her the way she does." "You're jealous," June said quietly. Anne did not answer. "Mary's decent," Adele said. "Maybe that's why. She's from the sticks, and her parents still come to see her on visiting days, and there's something about her so -- so innocent. Maybe that's why Miss Bestris likes her." June said, "I think she's better than the rest of us. I think Miss Bestris feels sorry for her in a way." "Don't make me laugh," Anne said, facing June. "The only one that'll ever feel sorry for her is herself!" "You shouldn't have talked like that to her!" June snapped. "Why don't you let her alone? She'll feel bad enough without you helping!" Anne rolled over on the bed and stared up at the ceiling. June took a helox lamp from her drawer and started to bake her hair darker. Those Earthmen were so funny about colors. In the kitchen, Mary took die cake out of the oven. It was steamy and light and fluffy, and it smelled sweet and warm. She set it on the table and mixed a two-minute green frosting which she spread, carefully, over the cake. She patted here and there with the spatula and stood back, her eyes proud and serious. She hummed a little tune under her breath as she scrubbed the pots and pans. Her hands moved in practiced rhythm, and the water splashed and gurgled. When the kitchen was again spotless, she looked once more at the cake, and then, turning out the light, she went back to her room. Anne and Adele had left, but June was sitting quietly in the dusky moonlight. Her white dress seemed vaguely luminous. Laughing, Mary flicked on the light. "It's a wonderful cake," she said. "The best one I ever made. Just the way it should be." "I wouldn't feel too bad, Mary, if he doesn't come to eat it," June said. "I don't want to sound like Anne, but there was a lot of sense in what she said." "It's just like a real wedding cake." She hummed the snatch of Martian tune. "Like in the telepapers." She laughed with her eyes. "The bridegroom takes the silver knife and cuts two large pieces of the cake while the bride, dressed in filament coral, stands at his right hand. She carries a bouquet of -- Anne just likes to be mean!" June frowned. Mary crossed to the dressing table. She studied her face in the mirror. It was heart shaped, elfin; her purple hair was a riot of curls, and her eyes were amethyst and gold. She smiled at herself. "I want to look as pretty as I can tonight." She twisted around. "You don't think he'll come either, do you?" "I -- no, Mary." Mary looked back at the mirror. "He likes our canal blossom perfume." She dabbed some of it on her ear lobes. "I like it best, too." June stood up, crossed to the musikon, found a slow five-toned waltz. She turned the music very low, and left the color mixer dim enough so that only the faintest ghosts projected hues moved on walls and ceiling. Mary continued to stare into the mirror. "But he will come. I know it." June said nothing. "Don't you see. I just know he'll come." June crossed back to her seat. Mary turned from the mirror. "I'm sure he will. He's -- I mean..." June smiled wanly. "Well, he will! You'll see!" June said, "Even if it is an old dress, you look very nice in it." "I've been learning his language. I can say 'thank you' and 'yes' and 'no' and 'I love you' and all kinds of things in it. He gave me a book, and I've been studying. I want to be able really to talk with him. We've got a lot to talk about. I want to find out about his parents, and what he likes for supper and what kind of music he likes to hear, and -- and all sorts of things. I want to find out all about his planet, and..." "Yes," June said wearily, "I know." The music played on. The moving lights on the walls were like colored reflections from a sunlit river. "He may be a little late tonight ; he has a lot to do, first. But he'll be here." Buzzzzz... It was the red button; it blinked on and off. "Visitors," June said. "Look -- " Mary said. "Look, June. I'm not half ready yet. Look. Tell Miss Bestris I'll be down a little late. Tell her I have a special boy, and it'll be all right. He wants me to wait for him." June was on her feet... All right. You'd better not wait too long!" "I won't." After June was gone, Mary returned to the task of making her face pretty, but after a moment, she turned from the mirror, leaned back, and tried to relax. Underneath her dress, her heart was pounding. The warm air carried sounds of the night creatures. One of the great canal insects, screeching, flapped by the window. The tiny third moon crept up over the horizon, and the buildings cast triple shadows. Buzzz. Buzzzz . Still Mary waited. Buzzz . Buzzzz. Buzzzzzz... She was afraid to wait any longer. But by now she was sure that he would be down stairs. There was a last-minute flurry of combing and primping, and then she rustled out of the room, her head erect, her eyes shining. gan threw shimmering, prismatic beams on the ceiling. Beneath it, stiff, embarrassed spacemen, mostly officers dressed in parade uniforms, chatted in space-pidgin with the laughing, rainbow-haired girls. Miss Bestris sat in one corner, her eyes roving the room: settling here for a second, there for a second, checking, approving, disapproving, silently. Occasionally she would smile or nod at one of the girls or one of the spacemen, and once she frowned ever so slightly and shook her head. Anne was reclining on a couch, eating a golden Martian apple, listening to a second mate; she played with a lock of his hair and smiled her wide smile. June, angelic, sat primly in a straight-backed chair, the captain at her feet, a boyish, space-pale Earthman, drew embarrassed circles on the carpet with his index finger. In the next room, three couples were dancing to the slow music of an Earth orchestra. An inner door opened, and a uniformed native sheriff stepped in, a crisp, military figure. "Miss Bestris?" She stood up. "Yes?" The Earthmen fell silent, waiting. "We think we have your runaway." He turned to the door. "Bring her in." Two more sheriffs entered, and between them, there was a young, slender girl. Her face was gaunt and tear-stained. Her body trembled. She looked at the Madame fearfully. "You idiots!" Miss Bestris screamed. "Get her out of here! You'll ruin my party! Take her out!" The two men removed the girl. To the remaining sheriff, Miss Bestris said, "Damn you, if you ever do anything like that again, I'll... I'll..." "I'm sorry, Madame. But we wanted immediate identification. Would you want us to hold the wrong girl?" "That's her, all right! Now, get out! Wait for me in my office." When they were gone Miss Bestris turned to the silent room. In quite passable Esperanto she said, "I -- am sorry. A misunderstanding. I assure you, nothing. Go on with the party, and I'll see what I can do for the poor girl." She stood up and in her own language said, "Lively, girls! Smile! You, Rita, hurry and serve tea!" She made her exit. The spacemen grumbled among themselves, coughed uneasily, watched the closed door through which the Madame had gone. Listening, they could hear only a muted mumble of sing-song sounds in several voices. With determined animation, the girls moved about, smiled, chatted. Rita came in, wheeling the tea tray, and the girls converged on it, each trying to be the first to serve her escort. The tea was the Martian stuff, concocted of a kind of local hemp. The Earthmen found it harsh and bitter to the taste, but gentle on the soul. Anne had filled two cups and returned to the second mate when she caught sight of Mary coming down the stairs. On the lowest step, Mary stood for a long time; her eyes eagerly searched the crowd. Slowly a puzzled, hurt look came over her face. June came to her side after a little while. "Isn't he here?" "No. Not yet." "I'm sorry," June said, touching Mary's arm lightly. "It's all right. It's early yet. I'll just sit down by Miss Bestris chair and wait for him." She turned from June and went to the chair. Before she could sit down, a space corporal came over, bowed, tried to take her hand. She shook her head. He smiled twistedly and walked stiffly away. Another man smiled at her. She shook her head slowly. Someone came in the front door, and she leaned forward. Then she slumped back limply. She heard a tinkly laugh. She looked in its direction. She met Anne's eyes, bright and amused. Just then Miss Bestris came in, her eyes angry and her cheeks flushed. She strode across the room. "Well," she said. "I'm glad to see you finally came down." She sank heavily into her chair. "(Present's back. They just brought her in. The idiots came right in here with her. I'll bet I lost half-a-dozen customers. These Earthmen are sensitive about such things." Mary was still staring at the door; Miss Bestris looked down at her. "Well, what are you sitting here for?" "Please, Miss Bestris. I'm waiting for my special boy friend tonight." She snorted and looked away. "Why isn't he here?" "He will be." "He'd better. I'll let you wait another -- half an hour. That's all." "Thank you, Miss Bestris. You're very kind to me." "I indulge you more than I ought to, child," she said. "More than is good for you, if the truth were known." A man came in; Mary stiffened and then relaxed. The mutter of voices blended into a steady hum. More couples were dancing. Miss Bestris moved around the room. The music was tinny. Another man came in. "Your time's up," the Madame told Mary. "Please, let me just wait for another few minutes." Miss Bestris fixed her lips grimly. "I've had enough nonsense for tonight. You heard me!" "Please!" "You heard what I said." "Miss Bestris, I couldn't. Not tonight. Honest, I couldn't. If I had to talk to anybody, I'd break down and cry. He'll... come. I know he will." Miss Bestris whirled on her. "Listen, you little -- " But she stopped, suddenly. "All right," she said, gritting her teeth. "I can't afford another scene tonight. But you'll be sorry for this." Miss Bestris stormily looked away. The dancers danced ; the music swelled louder. Gradually, deliberately, the lights were waning. "Haven't I always been good to you, Mary?" the Madame asked. "Yes." "Then like an obedient girl, do as I say. If he hasn't come by now, he just won't. He's gone to some other house." "No!" Mary said doggedly. "Just remember, tomorrow, how you deliberately disobeyed me. Your silly emotions are costing me money, and that's one thing I simply won't stand for." "He'll come." Mary said. "You won't lose money." Couples sat side by side, laughing, talking in whispers. Occasionally there were giggles. The room began to empty slowly. The lights continued to dim until the rooms were gloomy. Even the shifting shades of the color organ were no more than a faint lambence. Anne, laughing, helped her second mate to his feet. "I'll give you one more chance," Miss Bestris said. "The next man that comes in..." "No! I just couldn't! Not tonight!" A few more customers drifted in. Then even the stragglers stopped coming. It was very late. "He's deserted you; you see that now?" Madame Bestris sneered. Mary stood up. There were tears in her eyes. "You can't -- you don't -- know -- how I feel," she choked. "You don't care!" She turned and ran up the stairs, crying. Several Earthmen, still in the big room, turned to watch. The torches were misty twinkles now. The last couples climbed the stairs and then Miss Bestris, too, went to bed. town awoke; commerce began. At seven, Miss Bestris lay in bed frowning, considering the events of the previous evening. But she was not so annoyed that she forgot to call a doctor on the teleview and arrange for him to come at nine to give a physical examination. Her bulk out of bed, she dressed and went to the kitchen to brew a pot of hemp tea. The cleaning maid, moving about in the next room, heard Miss Bestris call sharply: "Flavia! Come in here!" Flavia appeared with a dust rag in her hand. "Did you cut this cake?" "No, ma'am." Miss Bestris glowered. "That little idiot! She must have slipped down here after we were all asleep and sat here and cried her silly little eyes out! If she thinks she can pull that love-sick act on me she'll soon find out different. Am I supposed to put up with having her moon over every space tramp that comes in? Why, I've taken more from her -- !" "Yes, ma'am." Miss Bestris waddled to the stairs, climbed them determinedly. At Mary's door she stopped and twisted the knob. Locked! Miss Bestris hammered. "Open up, Mary!" The door rattled under her hand. "Open that door at once!" No answer. Miss Bestris pounded harder. "Open up, I say!" Anne sauntered into the hall, her dressing gown swishing. "She really made you look the fool last night, didn't she?" Anne said lazily. "You -- you slut! Mind your own business." Anne smiled and shrugged. "Open the door, Mary! Do you hear me! Open it!" "Maybe she killed herself," Anne said. "It has happened." "My God! No... She wouldn't dare. You think she would?" Anne shrugged again. "They do funny things sometimes." Miss Bestris' face was red. "Run down and get my keys. In my desk. You know where they are." Then, "For God's sake , hurry!" While she waited Miss Bestris rattled the door, pleading and cursing. Finally Anne returned. Miss Bestris snatched the key with a shaking hand. She hurled the door open and burst inside. "See here, you little -- !" She stopped. The room was empty. On the neatly made bed reposed a little stack of money. When Miss Bestris got around to counting it, she found that it contained exactly nine hundred and ten dordocs . as you've ever seen in a science fiction magazine. For instance: about the Central Investigation Bureau and the new World Government of the #nd Century; there's a short classic, by curl your hair; also top-notch stories by Mark Clifton and Alex Apostolides, Edward W. Ludwig, H. B. Fyfe and others. There's a song that says " it's later than you think" and it is perhaps lamentable that someone didn't sing it for Henry that beautiful morning... Pipe of Peace By. James McKimmey, Jr. His wife, a short thin woman with worried eyes, watched him while he sat before the kitchen table. He was thin, too, like his wife, but tall and tough-skinned. His face, with its leather look was immobile. "Why?" asked his wife. "Good reasons," the farmer said. He poured yellow cream into a cup of coffee. He let the cup sit on the table. "Henry?" said the woman, as though she were really speaking to someone else. She walked around the kitchen in quick aimless bird steps. "My right," said Henry. He lifted his cup, finally, tasting. "We'll starve." crazy," she said, as though it were "Not likely. Not until everybody a half-question, a half-pronounceelse does, anyway." ment. The woman circled the room and The farmer was relaxing now, came back to her husband. Her leaning back in his chair. "Might eyes winked, and there were lines have. Might have, at that." between them. Her fingers clutched "Why?" she asked, the edge of the table. "You've gone The farmer turned his coffee cup carefully. "Thing to do, is all. Each man in his own turn. This is my turn." The woman watched him for a long time, then she sat down on a chair beside the table. The quick, nervous movement was gone out of her, and she sat like a frozen sparrow. The farmer looked up and grinned. "Feels good. Just to sit here. Does well for the back and the arms. Been working too hard." "Henry," the woman said. The farmer tasted his coffee again. He put the cup on the table and leaned back, tapping his browned fingers. "Just in time, I'd say. Waited any longer, it wouldn't have done any good. Another few years, a farmer wouldn't mean anything." The woman watched him, her eyes frightened as though he might suddenly gnash his teeth or leap in the air. "Pretty soon," the farmer said, "they'd have it all mechanical. Couldn't stop anything. Now," he said, smiling at his wife, "we can stop it all." "Henry, go out to the fields," the woman said. "No," Henry said, standing, stretching his thin, hard body. "I won't go out to the fields. Neither will August Brown nor Clyde Briggs nor Alfred Swanson. None of us. Anywhere. Not until the food's been stopped long enough for people to wake up." The farmer looked out of the kitchen window, beyond his tractor and the cow bam and the windmill. He looked at rows of strong com, shivering their soft silk in the morning breeze. "We'll stop the corn. Stop the wheat. Stop the cattle, the hogs, the chickens." "You can't." "I can't. But al! of us together can." "No sense," the woman said, wagging her head. "No sense. "It's sense, all right. Best sense we've ever had. Can't use an army with no stomach. Old as the earth. Can't fight without food. Takes food to run a war. "You'll starve the two of us, that's all you'll do. Nobody else will stop work." The farmer turned to his wife. "Yes, they will. Everywhere a farmer is the same. He works the land. He reads the papers. He votes. He listens to the radio. He watches the television. Mostly, he works the land. Alone, with his own thoughts and ideas. He isn't any different in Maine than he is in Oregon. We've all stopped work. Now. This mom  #) mg. "How about those across the ocean? Are they stopping, too? They're not going to feed up their soldiers? To kill us if we don't starve first? To -- " "They stopped, too. A farmer is a farmer. Like a leaf on a tree. No matter on what tree in what country on whose land. A leaf is a leaf. A farmer's the same. A farmer is a farmer." "It won't work," the woman said dully. "Yes, it will." "They'll make you work." "How? It's our own property." "They'll take it away from you." "Who'll work it then?" The woman rocked in her chair, her mouth quivering. "They'll get somebody." The farmer shook his head. "Too many people doing other things, like making shells and guns, like sitting in fox-holes or flying planes." The woman sat rocking, her hands together in her lap. "It won't work," she repeated. "It'll work," said the farmer. "Right now , it'll work. Yes, we've got milkers and shuckers, and we've got hatchers for the chickens. We've got tractors and combines and thrashing machines. They're all mechanical, all right. But we don't have mechanical farmers, yet. The pumps, the tractors, the milkers don't work by themselves. In time, maybe. Not now. We're still ahead of them on that. It'll work." "Go out to the fields, Henry," his wife said, her voice like the sound of a worn phonograph record. "No," the farmer said, taking a pipe from his overalls. "I think instead, I'll just sit in the sun and watch the corn. Watch the birds on top of the bam, maybe. I'll fill my pipe and sit there and smoke and watch. And when I get sleepy, I'll sleep. After while I might go see August Brown or Clyde Briggs or maybe Alfred Swanson. We'll sit and talk, about pleasant things, peaceful things. We'll wait." The farmer put the pipe between his teeth and walked to the door. He put on his straw hat, buttoned the sleeves of his blue shirt and stepped outside. His wife sat at the table, staring at nothing in the room. The farmer walked across the barnyard, listening to the sound of the chickens and the sound of the breeze going through the com. Near the bam, he sat upon an old tree stump and filled his pipe with tobacco. He lit the pipe, cupping his hands, and sat there, smoking, the smoke spiraling up into the bright warm air. He took his pipe from his teeth and looked at it. "Pipe of peace," he said, laughing inside himself. The breeze was soft and the sun warm on his back. He sat there, smoking, feeling the quiet of the morning, the peace of the great sky above. He had no time to stand or to take his pipe from his mouth, when the two men crossed the yard and lifted him up by the arms. He dropped the pipe, while he was dragged past the house, to the road beyond. He had no time to yell or scream, before his hat was swept from his head, the overalls and the blue shirt stripped from his body. He had not even thought about what it was that had happened, before he was thrust inside a white truck, with strong steel sides and with grilled windows like those of a cell. He was just sitting there, in the truck, without his clothes, speeding away with August Brown and Clyde Briggs and Alfred Swanson. upon the earth. Chickens clucked in their pens, while birds fluttered about the top of the bam. A pig squealed. The corn rustled. ( Continued on page #I ) mm  A xfwviV ; A He was a reporter from Venus with an assignment on Earth. He got his story but, against orders, he fell in love -- and therein lies this story. The Huddlers Illustrated by Ernie Barth them, where I come from, huddlers. Damnedest thing to see from any distance, the way they huddle. They had one place, encrusting the shore line for miles on one of the land bodies they called the Eastern Seaboard. A coagulation in this They called it New York, and it was bigger than most of the others, but typical. It wasn't bad enough living side by side; the things built mounds and lived one above the other. Apartments they called them. What monstrosities they were. We couldn't figure this huddling, at first. All our attention since Akers' first penetration into space had been directed another way in the galaxy, and though I'll grant you unified and universal concentration may be considered unwise in some areas, it's been our greatest strength. It's brought us rather rapidly to the front, I'm sure you'll agree, and we're not the oldest planet, by a damned sight. Well, by the time we got to the huddlers, Akers was dead and Murten was just an old man with vacant eyes. Jars was handling the Department, though you might say Deering ran it, being closer to most of the gang. Jars was always so cold ; nobody ever got to know him really well. They divided on the huddling. Fear, Jars said, and love, Deering said, but who could say for sure? As Deering said to me, "What could they fear? They've got everything they need, everything but knowledge and their better specimens are getting closer to that, every day." In the laboratory, Deering said this, and how did we know old Jars was in a corner, breaking down a spirigel? "They fear each other," Jars said, as though it was an official announcement, as though any fact is permanent. "And they fear nature. It's the most fear ridden colony of bipeds a sane mind could imagine." Deering looked at me, and winked. Jars went back to the spirigel. Deering said, "Love, love, love. All they sing about, all they write about, all they talk about, love, love, love." Jars was just tracing a z line on the spirigel and he put down his legort at that. "Rather superficial thinking, from a scientist," he said quietly. "Surface manifestations to be considered as indicative. Oral and verbal camouflage to be accepted as valid. Deering, old thing, please -- " Deering shrugged. "So I am -- what do they call it, a Pollyanna. Isn't that a pretty word? So, I'm a Pollyanna." "I rather think that describes you partially," Jars said, "and with this particular planet we're discussing, it can be a dangerous attitude." "So?" Deering said, nudging me. "And could I ask why?" "Ask it." "I ask." "You've recorded the state of their development. They have, among other things, achieved nuclear fission." "So? In the fourth grade we are teaching nuclear fission." "We are a scientific people. They haven't been, until very, very recently. You have noted, I hope, their first extensive use of this new discovery?" "Hero -- Helo -- " Deering shrugged. "My memory." "Hiroshima," Jars supplied. "Love -- , my friend?" "I have noted it," Deering said. "We spoke, a while ago, of surface manifestations." "We shall continue to. You have witnessed the mechanical excellence of their machines, in some ways beyond ours, because of their greater element wealth. You have noted the increased concentration of their better minds, their scientific minds. How long do you think it will be, friend, before they are ready for us?" "Ready, ready -- ? In what way, ready?" "The only way they know, the only thing they seem to have time for -- ready for war." "War -- ," Deering said, and sighed. "Oh, Jars, they will be beyond war, certainly, before they are cognizant of us. They are no tribe of incompetents; they grow each day." "They -- ?" Jars' smile was cynical. "Their scientists grow. Are their scientists in command, sir?" That "sir" had been unnecessary; Jars was the senior mind, here. Deering didn't miss it, and he flushed. Jars said softly, "I apologize. It was not a thing to say. I have spent too much time in the study of these -- monsters." They had gone to school, together, those two, and the bond was there and the respect, but they were different, mentally, and each knew it. "You have a sharp tongue," Deering said, "but a sharper mind. I believe I can stand it." He smiled. "Love, fear, hate -- what does it matter to us, except as phenomena?" "It matters to us, believe me, please. It concerns us very much, Am." When Jars got to first names, he was emotionally wrought. I looked at him in surprise. And so did Deering. We weren't ever going to warm up to him, but he was our best mind and there wasn't a man in the department who didn't appreciate that. We stared at him, and he sat down on the high bench near the Maling converters. He looked old and he was tired, we could see. "Evil," he said quietly. "Fear, hate, evil -- which of the three is the father and which are the sons? I suppose fear is the father." "I'd always thought so," Deering said, "though my education was almost completely confined to the technical. I'm rather skimpy on the humanities." "And I," Jars said, and now looked at me. "But not you, Werig " "I don't know them, sir," I said. "Surface manifestations, as we've said before, today. It would need a closer study. Their huddling is what intrigues me the most." One of the rare smiles came to Jars' lined face as he looked at Deering. "Huddling, the lad says. If you don't say it, I won't, Arn." Deering smiled in return. "We'll change the routine, this time; you say 'love' and I'll say 'fear. But seriously, Jars, you fear these -- people?" "I fear them," Jars said. "Scientifically, perhaps, they are tyros, but mechanically they are not. They have discovered forces and developed machines which they do not understand, and yet, have achieved efficiency with them. I fear any monster that powerful even though it is blind." "And you think there is a possibility of their becoming -- aware of us within any determinable time?" "I do. You will remember how quickly the Algreans developed, once they achieved unity? You will remember how quickly they became a threat?" "Yes," Deering said quietly, "and I have been trying a long time to forget what we did to that planetoid." "It was necessary for survival," Jars said simply. "I think, by any standards, we would be the ones chosen to survive." Deering's smile was cynical. "At least, by our standards. We had a closer communication with them. About the huddlers, we know only what we convert from their stronger video broadcasts. It is a device they seem to use more for entertainment than for information." Jars nodded, and stood up. "And love is their major entertainment, perhaps. Love and war. But we gabble. I had a plan in mind, a plan to put before the assembly." was part of it. The humanities had been no major with me, but they didn't want a scholar, they wanted a reporter, anyway. Or perhaps I could be called a recorder. Jars talked and the assembly listened. They always do, when Jars talks. And I was their boy, and went into a concentrated and complete briefing. They put me under the lucidate and poured it to me, night and day, all the information we had on the huddlers and all the theories based on that information. They put me into a space sphere, and said "good luck" and do our people proud, young man. Oh, yes. And don't fall in love. Oh, no. They'd pick me up, again, when they got a signal. They didn't expect to wait too long for that, I guess, at the time. The sphere was a relic of the Algrean business, and Algrea hadn't been this much of a trip. But Mechanics said it would do, and it did. I landed in the Pacific, about three-quarters of a mile off the Santa Monica yacht basin, and let the sphere float north for a while until I reached a secluded spot. In a small curve of the shore line, a few miles above Santa Monica, I beached her, and opened the dissolving cocks. I watched her melt into the surging water, and turned to face the red and green light almost immediately overhead. I walked up from the beach to the road, not even knowing what they looked like. Their evolution should have matched ours, but who could be sure? For all I knew, I might be a freak to them. I should have thought of that before dissolving the ship. Above, the light changed from red to green and across the street, I saw a sign. This was Sunset Boulevard, and the Pacific Coast Highway. This was open country, but Los Angeles. Along the Coast Highway, a pair of lights were bearing down on me, and they seemed to waver, as though the machine were under imperfect control. I moved back, out of the way, and the light overhead turned to red. The car stopped about even with me, its motor running. I couldn't see the occupants nor the driver. The light changed, the car jerked, and the motor stopped. "Damn," somebody said. It was a female voice. There was a grinding noise, and another damn, and then a head appeared through the open window on my side of the road. It was a blond head, and what I could see of the face looked attractive. "Are you sober?" she asked. "Not always," I answered. "Some times I'm quite cheerful. But I'm some distance from home, and have nothing to be cheerful about, at the moment." "Try not to be a Cerf," she said angrily. "What I mean is, are you -- have you been drinking?" "Not recently, though I could use some water." I could see her face more clearly now, and it was like the faces of our women, only prettier than most, I thought. "Look," she said, "Pm drunk. Could you drive this thing? Could you drive me home?" "I'd be glad to," I answered, "if you will tell me where you live." She gave me an address on Sunset, and this was Sunset, this lateral street, ending at the ocean. So, quite obviously, it was an address I could find. I went over to climb in behind the wheel. There were two smells in that pretty car with the canvas top. One smell was of gasoline, the other was of alcohol. "There's obviously alcohol in the gasoline," I said, "though that shouldn't prevent it from igniting." "A funny, funny man," she said. "Keep the dialogue to a minimum, will you, Bogart? Fm not exactly sharp, right now." I depressed the starter button, and the motor caught. I swung left onto Sunset, and started up the hill. The car was clearly a recent model, but Jars had been wrong about the mechanical excellence of these huddlers. The machine simply had no life, no zest. around two curves, climbing all the while, past some huddled houses on the left, and the whole shining sea spread out on the right. The woman said, "If you know a place where the coffee is drinkable, stop." "I have no money," I said. Diamonds I had, a bagful of them, for AVe knew that huddlers treasured diamonds. But no money. "I've got money," she said. "I've got a hell of a lot more money than I have sense. Have you ever been in love, Bogart?" "Never," I said. We were coming into a small huddled area, now. A sign read. Pacific Palisades . "I have," she said. "I still am. Isn't it a miserable rotten world?" "This one?" I asked, and then said quickly, "I mean -- this part of it?" "Any part of it," she said. "I've seen most of it, and any part where there's men is bad, Bogart." "My name," I told her, "is not Bogart. My name is Fred Werig." "A pleasure, Fred," she said. "My name is Jean Decker. And I'm beginning to feel better." "It couldn't be my company," I said, "so it must be the air. I haven't seen any coffee places that are open." I caught a flare of light from the comer of my eye, and turned to see her applying flame to something in her mouth. I remembered from our history; she was smoking. It was a habit long dead where I came from. And then I remembered what she'd said about being drunk, and knew that, too, as one of our long disused vices. What was it Akers had said about 'being directed'? A theory, but discredited now, since our scientific advance. But this almost parallels evolution? "Cigarette?" she said, and I said, "No, thanks. I -- don't smoke." "You're the only thing in Los Angeles that doesn't," she said bitterly. "Where are you from, Fred?" "New York," I said. "Where are you from, Jean?" "Believe it or not, I was bom here," she said. "Fm one of the three people in this town who was Bom here." "It's a big town, isn't it?" I said. "Less huddled than the others." "Huddled," she said, and laughed. "Huddled. I like that. They huddle, all right, and not just the football teams. The gregarious instinct, Freddy boy." "Well, yes," I agreed, "but why, Jean? Why haven't they outgrown it? Is it -- fear?" "You would have to ask somebody bright," she said. "When you get to Bundy, turn over toward Wilshire. We'll find an eating place that's open." "You tell me when I get to Bundy," I said. "I'm not exactly familiar with this part of town." She told me, and we got to Wilshire, eventually, and on Wilshire there were many eating places. We went into one; it was too cold to eat outside. And it was bright in there, and I got my first really clear look at the face and figure of Jean Decker. Well, it was ridiculous, the attraction that seemed to emanate from her. It actually made me weak. And she was staring at me, too. backed benches, and she sat down. I sat across from her. "I don't have a tailor," I said. "Your lips are so red, Jean." She frowned. "Slowly, sailor." Then a waitress was there, and I saw how red her lips were, too, and I realized it was another of the old vices I'd forgotten, cosmetics. "Just coffee, for me, black," Jean said. "Golden boy over there will have a beef barbecue, probably, won't you, Fred?" "I guess," I said. "And some milk, cow's milk." Jean laughed. "It's my money. Have canary milk." "Not tonight," I said. The waitress went away, and there was a noticeable period of silence. Jean was tracing some design on the table top with her index finger. Her nails, too, were painted, I saw. I liked the effect of that. She looked up, and faced me gravely, "Fred, you're a very at"If you're hungry," she said finally, "get a sandwich. You won't find me stingy... What in the world is that material in that suit, Fred?" "I don't know," I said. "You are beautiful, Jean." She smiled. "Well, thanks. You can have a piece of pie, too, for that. That certainly is a fine weave in that material. What did your tailor call it?" We were next to a sort of alcove, furnished with a table and two hightractive gent, which you undoubtedly know. Are you connected with pictures?" I shook my head. "Just a traveler, a tourist." She said, "Oh" and went back to tracing the design. I thought her finger trembled. A very dim smile on her face, and she didn't look away from the table top. "You've been -- picked up before, undoubtedly." "No. What kind of talk is this, Jean?" Now, she looked up. "Crazy talk. You're no New Yorker, Freddy lad. You're a Middle Westerner; you can't fool me. Fresh from the farm and craving cow's milk." "I never saw a cow in my life," I told her truthfully, "though I've heard about them. What makes you think I'm from a farm?" "Your freshness, your complexion and -- everything about you." The waitress brought our food, then, and I didn't answer. I tried to keep my eyes away from Jean as I ate; I had a mission, here, and no time for attachments beyond the casual. I was sure, even then, that loving Jean Decker would never qualify as casual. She drank her coffee and smoked; I ate. She asked, "Where are you staying, in town, Fred? I'm sober enough to drive, now." "I'll get public transportation," I said. "You get home, and to bed." She laughed. "Public transportation? Freddy, you don't know this town. There isn't any. Did you just get here, tonight?" I looked at her, and nodded. "On the bum?" she said quietly. "I -- suppose," I said honestly, "though the word has connotations which don't describe me." I put my hand in my jacket pocket and fumbled in the open bag for one of the smaller diamonds. I brought one out about the size of my little finger nail, and placed it on the table. All the light in the room seemed to be suddenly imprisoned there. She stared at it, and up at me. "Fred -- for heaven's sake -- that's not -- real, is it?" I nodded. "But -- it -- " She glanced from the diamond to me, her mouth partially open. "Fred, what kind of monstrous gag is this? God, I thought I'd seen everything, growing up in this town. Fred -- " "I'd like to sell it," I said. "You, Jean, are my only friend in this town. Could you help me arrange for its sale?" She was looking at me with wonder now, studying me. "Hot?" she asked. "Hot -- ?" "Stolen -- you know what I mean." "Stolen? Jean, you didn't mean to accuse me of that." Skepticism was ugly on her lovely face. "Fred, what's your angle? You step out of the darkness like some man from Mars in a strange suit, with no money, but a diamond that must be worth -- " "We'll learn what it's worth," I said. "Mars isn't inhabited, Jean. Don't you trust me? Have I done anything to cause you to distrust me?" "Nothing," she said. "Do you distrust all men, Jean?" "No. Just the ones I've met. Oh, baby, and I thought you were a farmer." She was crushing out her cigarette. "You haven't a place to stay, but I've got a guest house, and you'll stay there, tonight. You aren't stepping back into the darkness, tonight, Fred Werig. You, I want to know about." The words held a threat, but not her meaning, I was sure. And what better way to orient myself than in the home of a friend? Massive, in an architecture I'd assumed was confined to the southeastern United States. Two-story place, with huge, two-story pillars and a house-wide front porch, the great lawn studded with giant trees. And she lived there alone, excepting for the servants. She was no huddler, and I told her that. "Dad owned a lot of property in this town," she said. "He was a great believer in the future of this town." At the time I didn't understand what that had to do with her lack of huddling. The guest house was small, but very comfortable, a place of three bedrooms and two baths and a square living room with a natural stone fireplace. I had my first night of sleep on this planet, and slept very well. I woke to a cloudy morning, and the sound of someone knocking on the front door. It was a servant, and she said, "Miss Decker sent me to inform you that breakfast will be ready any time you want it, sir. We are eating inside, this morning, because of the cold." "I'll be there, soon, thank you," I said, and she went away. Showering, I was thinking of Akers for some reason and his directed theory and what was that other theory he'd had? Oh, yes, the twin planets. Senile, he was, by that time and not much listened to, but a mind like that? And who had he been associated with at that time? It was before my birth, but I'd read about it, long ago. The Visitor, Akers had called this man. The Earth man who had come to Venus. And what had his name been? Beer -- ? Beers -- ? No, but like that -- and it came. Ambrose Bierce. Jean wore a light green robe, for breakfast, and it was difficult for me to take my eyes away from her. "I'm not usually this informal at mixed breakfasts," she told me, smiling, "but I thought it might warm up enough for a swim a little later." She threw the robe aside, and I saw she was wearing a scanty garment beneath it. Evidently the huddlers didn't swim naked, and I wondered at a moral code that sanctioned drinking alcohol but was ashamed of the human body. I was glad the house had been cold when I answered the maid's summons, for I had worn a robe I'd found there. Fruit juice and wheat cakes and sausage and toast and jelly and eggs and milk. We ate in a small room, off a larger dining room, a small room whose walls were glass on two sides. "It's too old a house to modernize completely," Jean told me. "I grew up in this house." "You don't -- work, Jean?" "No. Should I?" "Work or study. Life must be very dull if you don't do one of those." "You might have a point there," she said. "I tried everything from the movies to sculpture. I wasn't very good at anything. What do you do, Fred?" "I'm a perpetual guest," I said lightly. "Do you read much, Jean?" "Too much, though nothing very heavy, I grant you." "Have you ever read about a man named Ambrose Bierce?" "I've read everything he ever wrote. Why did you ask that, Fred?" "I -- heard about him. I wondered who he was." "Where did you hear about him, Fred? In Mexico?" "No. I don't remember where I heard about him." "He disappeared," she said quietly, "some time right before the first world war. I've forgotten the exact year. I think it was #." Before the war, before the "first" war... And I thought of Jars' wife, who had come to us just before this last planetary war -- the "second" world war. And what was his pet name for her? Guest, he called her, and joked about her coming from another world. But didn't Jars defend the discredited late-in-life theories of Akers? I tried to remember the name of Jars' wife, and then it came. I asked, "And Amelia Earhart?" Jean's voice was rough. "July #nd, #. I guess I'll never forget that, when my god died. What are you trying to say? Is it some new damned cult you're promoting, Fred?" "You called her a god. Why, Jean?" "I don't know. I was only thirteen when she died. But she was so clean, so -- so free and windswept, so -- oh, what the spirit of America should be -- and isn't." I looked up to see tears in her eyes. Why was she moved? This girl who certainly knew corruption, this worldly, lovely girl. I smiled at her. She wiped the tears with the back of her hand. "Fred, you are the strangest -- I know this town's a zoo, but you, Fred -- " I continued to smile at her. "I'm just a guy trying to learn. May I repeat something I said last night? You're beautiful, Jean." "You're no three-headed calf, yourself," she said. Twin planets and parallel evolution... Parallel destiny? Not with a third planetary war shaping up here. Three major wars in less than fifty years. Why, why, why... She said, "Thinking, again? You do a lot of thinking, don't you?" "I have to think of something besides you," I told her honestly. "I can't afford to fall in love with you, Jean. I've too many places to go and too many things to see." She just stared at me. It must have been a full minute before she said, "Well, I'll be damned." After breakfast, it was still cold, and she said, "There'll be no swim this morning, I see. If you want to get an appraisal on that diamond, Fred, I'll phone one of our jewelers to come out." "I'd appreciate that," I said. "Would it be all right if I took these newspapers back to my room, now?" "Just dandy," she said. "Sorry to be boring you." "You're not," I told her earnestly. "Believe me, you're not." Nowhere was it stated, but a glance at the front pages showed they were on opposite sides of the political fence. On my planet, we keep the editorial opinion in the editorial columns. Not so with these. The wire services were impartial and the accounts in both papers identical. That was as far as the similarities went. Reading the other accounts was like living in two worlds. An informed people will always be free. Well, perhaps these weren't typical. I was to see papers a lot worse than these before long. I was just starting the want ads when the knock came at the door. It was the maid, again; the jeweler was at the house. A small man, suave and dark, with the manners of a diplomat, fawning like a puppy. It was a perfect stone, he decided. He had, he was sure, a customer who would be interested. Would I accept eight thousand dollars for it? I said I would, and he left. We were in the living room, and Jean stood near the tall front windows. She had changed to a suit of some soft blue material. "As soon as I get the money," I said, "we're going out for some fun, aren't we? I owe you for a beef barbecue." "You don't owe me anything," she said. She didn't look at me. "You'll get over him," I said. "Him -- ?" He turned to look at me curiously. "That man you're in love with, that man you told me about last night." "Oh," she said. "Oh. I was drunk last night, Fred. I'm not in love." Silence. That attraction of hers pulling at me like some localized gravity, silence, and the beating of my heart. Silence, my hands trembling, my knees aching. "I'd like to see some fights," I said. "Would you like to?" She frowned. "Not particularly." She stared at me, shook her head, and looked away. "Well," I said, "I haven't finished the want ads." "Of course," she said. "Get right back to them, Freddy. You never know when you'll find a bargain." They weren't very interesting. I kept seeing her standing next to the window, looking unhappy, frustrated, somehow. I kept seeing the soft fabric of the suit clinging to her beautiful body and the proud grace of her posture. I went back to the house, and she was sitting on the davenport near the fireplace. She looked up without expression. I asked, "Is there a library around here?" She sighed, and rose. She said, "Follow me." She led me to a room whose four walls were lined with books. There was a wide glass door leading out from this to the patio. "Dad's old retreat," she said. "Everything from Aristotle to Zola. If there's something you don't see, don't hesitate to ask. We aim to please." She closed the door behind her. I didn't gorge; I only nibbled. But fed enough to realize this was a deep, rich culture; this planet had produced some first rate minds and exceptional talents. But still, with all this to choose from, the people seemed to prefer Milton Berle. And the people were in command. I was reading Ambrose Bierce when she came in. She looked at the book, and at me. "Lunch," she said quietly. I put the book down, and rose. "The unwelcome guest?" "I'd tell you, if you were." "Would you, honestly?" She didn't answer that. She smiled, and said, "There are some fights at Ocean Park, tonight." We saw those, and later, some amateur fights. Strange spectacles they were, men belaboring each other, but fascinating, too. The amateurs were less talented, but more friendly, leaving the ring arm in arm, if both were still conscious. The professionals displayed no such amicability. Why? I asked Jean. What was the difference between the amateurs and the professionals? "Money," she said, and looked at me strangely. "Didn't you really know that?" I lied with a nod. "I wanted you to see it, and to word it for yourself." "Look," she said with controlled irritation, "if I want any curbstone philosophy, I can read one of those corny columnists. I certainly don't have to sit in a screaming mob watching a couple of morons pound each other bloody to arrive at a stupid generality like that." "Let's get a hamburger," I said. She just stood there, on the sidewalk. "You -- you -- " People were turning to stare. "Farmer?" I suggested. "Oh," she said, "oh, oh -- " "Or a cheeseburger," I added. There was a small crowd, now, openly watching. One man said, "Hey, this is better than them jerks inside. Slug him, lady." Jean started to laugh, and so did I, and then all of us were laughing, the whole crowd. We didn't go to a hamburger place. We went to a place where we could dance, too, and I had a small glass of wine, and wondered why we'd outgrown alcohol, on our planet. It was a night I will never forget. It was a night I learned how much she meant to me. There wasn't ever going to be anybody else for me, after that night. at five-thirty the next morning. And still, I didn't tell her where I was from. When the time came, she could go back with me, but I couldn't risk sharing that secret with her. I didn't have the right to jeopardize my people by giving her information she might divulge unintentionally. The world was our playground, and my study hall American first. We drove east, taking our time, while I tried to get the temper of the people. I never overlooked a chance to talk to people ; the papers were no subsitute for that. And between the papers and the people, I found that only the hysterics were voluble, only the biased articulate. And yet, it was a country with a liberal and progressive tradition, a country that should have been informed beyond the average. Knowledge had been made too easy; the glib were in command. Fear, Jars had said, and it was becoming increasingly clear to me that he was closer to it than Deering. For Deering's viewpoint, I had a working model, I had Jean. In the canyon city, New York, high in our room at the EmpireHudson, she said, "You're an awfully nosy guy, Dream Boat." "I like to talk to people," I said. "Haven't you been getting enough attention?" "As much as I can handle," she said. "And I'm enjoying every second of it. But it seems to be getting you down." "You or the people?" I asked, and mussed her hair. She didn't answer that. "Fred," she said, "do you remember that day at breakfast, long ago? Do you remember asking about Ambrose Bierce and Amelia Earhart?" "I guess I do." "Don't be evasive, Fred. You know you do." I pulled her close. "Is this going to be a questioning period? Is this one of those marriages?" "Now, Fred -- " she said, against my shoulder. "Be serious, please, Fred. Please be serious -- oh, you, Fred -- " that phrase they have -- "muddling through"? That's what they were doing. Proudly, with a minimum of complaint, with no thought of rebellion, with no rationalizing or projection, living as the submerged tenth lives in America, and seeming to think that -- well, things could be worse. In Italy, it was the kids, the beggars and procurers and thieves and even murderers who were kids. In Spain we found much of the same. In France it was all the heat and no light, charges and countercharges, lies and counter-lies, confusion and corruption. In Berlin, it was Russia. The cloud that darkens the world looms darkest in Berlin. The apathy that grips the world is epitomized in Berlin. A people with no sense of guilt and no reason for hope, nor stirring to the promise of a re-armed Germany. A bled and devastated people, shorn of their chief strength, their national pride. Jean said, "I've seen enough. Haven't you, Fred? How much can you take?" "One more," I said. "Russia." "Don't be silly," she said. "How would we get into Russia?" "We wouldn't. But I would." "Look, baby, whither though goest, I -- " "Up to here," I said. "Who's the big boss in this family?" "Now, Fred -- " "Now, Jean -- " "Get away from me. This time, it won't work. If you think that for one second you're going into that no man's land alone -- and -- " It took some talking, to convince her, it took some lies. She'd wait, she agreed finally, in Switzerland. In comfort for a change. It took two diamonds to get to the right man, and it took a formula from there. A formula that is learned in the first year of college chemistry on my planet, a formula for converting an element. A formula this planet couldn't have been more than a decade short of learning, anyway. The last man I saw in Berlin went along, for which I was grateful, though he didn't know that. I don't speak Russian, but he did. They were careful, they don't even trust themselves. I told Nilenoff the formula came from America, and there were more, but I needed money. I didn't tell him the fallacy in the formula ; it had taken us three years to realize what it was. My trips were limited, directed, and avoided the seamier side. I saw the modern humming factories, and the mammoth farms. No unemployment, no waste, no "capitalistic blood sucking" -- and the lowest standard of living in the industrialized world. A vast, bleak land peopled with stringless puppets, with walking cadavers. I remembered the faces of the crowds and the strangely mixed people in America, their obvious feelings, emotions and rivalries. There was nothing strange about these people of Russia -- they were dead, spiritually dead. The country that could have been a cultural and industrial center of the world was a robot-land of nine for war, getting ready to take over the dreams of Hitler and make them come true. I came out with a promise of ten thousand American dollars for every one of the future formulas I had assured them I could get to. I came out with the knowledge that I'd be a watched man from now on. In Switzerland, Jean said, "Well -- ?" "I'm ready to go home," I told her. "America, you mean?" "Where else?" "I've been alone," she said, "and thinking. I've gone back to Sunset and Pacific Coast Highway and traced it all forward from there. And I don't think America's your home." Very cool her voice, very tense her face. I smiled at her. She didn't smile in return. "Fred -- we're married." "I'm glad," I said. "Aren't you?" "It's no time for the light touch." Tears in her eyes. "Fred, are you a -- a Russian spy?" I shook my head. "But -- " It was a clear night, and I went to the window. How it shone, in that clear air. Jean came over to stand next to me. I pointed, and said, "There's my home." "Venus," she said. "Fred, for heaven's sake -- Vm serious !" "Some day," I said, "this planet will learn how to see through our manufactured fog. Some day they will develop the vision we developed a century ago. And -- " "Damn it, Fred, be serious. If you'd know what I've gone through, alone here, thinking back on all the crazy things you've said and done. What have you told me about yourself, what do I know?" "Nothing," I said. "And what have I asked you about yourself? It's a matter of faith, Jean." "Faith? Running all over the country like fugitives, financed by those damned diamonds, nosing into this and into that, and then running off to Russia, all alone. With what you'd learned , Fred?" I shook my head, resentment stirring in me. "Remember when we met? In Santa Monica -- right there, next to the beach. You didn't have a thing but the clothes on your back and a bagful of diamonds. Was it a sub that brought you that far, Fred?" "No," I said, "and you wouldn't believe me if I told you." "Try me, and see," she said. She was rigid, and near hysteria. "All right. I came there in a space sphere from Venus." She started to sob, a wild, lonely sound and I moved forward to take her in my arms. Her fingers clawed my face, her high heel smashed my instep. "Get out," she screamed, "get out, get out, get out -- " I got out. I went to the first floor washroom and cleaned up my bloody face, and then went into the bar. This was one habit I'd picked up on the planet. When I came up to the suite, later, I didn't even check to see if she was in the washroom. I flopped down on the davenport and didn't know anything for the next twelve hours. She was gone, when I came to. She'd checked out before I'd come back to the room, the night before. I missed the plane she took from France. I missed her by a day in New York. I went back to the big house with the high pillars on Sunset Boulevard. And she wasn't there. She'd come back to it, I knew. I moved in, to wait. I wasn't going home without her; I wasn't even sure I was going home with her. I was involved, now, in this planet, almost as crazy as the rest of them. I sat. I did some drinking, but mostly I sat, going back over all our days, reading nothing, enjoying nothing, just remembering. The Korean business started and the headlines grew uglier, and the jackals screamed and the people grew more confused. One day, the maid told me I had a visitor. I was in the library and I told her to send him back. When he came in, he closed the door behind him. I'd never seen him, before, but he said, "We've been looking for three weeks." "We?" "Thirty of us," he said. "What happened? Jars sent me." "Oh," I said. "I can't come, now. I'm -- married -- " He smiled. "If you knew what a mess it's been. We've got men all over the planet. Does your wife -- know?" "She thinks I'm crazy," I said. "Look, I -- " the huddlers "I'm not to argue," he said. "Just make your report, and I'll pick it up, tonight." Five minutes after he was gone, I was packing. I knew he wasn't coming back for any report. He was coming back for me, and it didn't much matter to him if I wanted to come, or not. I was coming, or staying here -- dead. What I didn't realize is that they wanted me to run, to get out where I could be taken with a minimum of interference. They got me the other side of Blythe, in the middle of nowhere. A clear night in the desert, and headlights coming up from behind and then the big, black car crowding me off the flat road, into the sand... And darkness. head. "Corruption, Werig? Was it the corruption, or the girl?" "I've made my report," I said. "Don't worry about them. They've got enough to worry about without worrying about us." "Another war, it looks like," Deering said. "It could be the last one, you know. What was the girl -- your wife like, Fred? Was she pretty?" "Beautiful," I said. "And the people -- fear, is it fear?" "I don't know. Their vice is fear, but they have some virtues." Deering's voice was quiet. "Jars wanted me to ask you -- about your wife. Where is she? Is she coming with you? It was forbidden." "I don't know where she is, she's not coming with me, and I know it was forbidden. But where is Jars? He has been avoiding me, hasn't he? Why?" "He has been pleading for you, before the assembly." Deering rose, and went to the window, to look out. "Who will win this war that's shaping up among the huddlers, Fred?" "I don't know. I'm not sure I give a damn." Deering continued to look out the window. "The gray nation, the mixed nation, this America; they have some promise of the light, have they not?" "Some." "But this black nation, this nation of robots, there is no chance of of light there?" "Not under their present leaders. If they should win the war the planet would be set back five hundred years." Deering shook his head, and turned to face me sadly. "It would be worse than that. If they should win this war shaping up, there would be no planet for them to rule." I stared at him, not believing, still so bound up in my trip I couldn't believe his words. Love , -- faith, fear, Jean -- were running through my mind. And Jean... ? Deering answered everything for me. "We can't take the chance," he said. "We will abolish the planet. The assembly so decided this mom  jj ing. His "Nature of Things " Is History's Largest Class K. Marshall was living the Dr . Roy K. Marshall hold equipment, he illustrates such diverse subjects as synthetic rubber, the fourth dimension, vacuum, new and interesting properties of metals and the causes and distributions of earthquakes. His talent as a modem classroom lecturer is remarkable. His programs are of only # minutes duration, and yet, in even that short time, some of the most complex phases of science are made clear and interesting -- opening up a whole new world of understanding for his vast audience, no matter what the age or education. T HE gray-haired, keen-eyed profour years ago, raised in Ohio, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and got his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan. Incidentally, the thesis for his doctorate was a dissertation on astrophysics. Galled "The best planetarium man in America" by the famed Dr. Harlow Shapely of Harvard, the youthful Doctor has been the director of two plane tariums -- Fels Planetarium in Philadelphia, and Moorehead at the University of North Carolina. When he's not writing newspaper articles, delivering lectures, or appearing as a guest on various radio and television shows (he's flown over # miles to meet such commitments in the last two years) Roy Marshall handles a job as educational director of a radio and television station in Philadelphia. Here he supervises, expedites and very often produces and directs approximately nine hours of educational radio and television shows. These shows are used regularly by teachers as assignments and have aided the further understanding of countless children. He also must, of course, prepare his own script and arrange and rehearse the network show "The Nature of Things". He recently completed a book titled "The Nature of Things -- from the hearts of the atoms to the ends of the universe", and is now hard at work on a second book. Dr. Marshall resigned his position as director of the Morehead Planetarium and Chairman of the Department of Astronomy at the University of North Carolina last year because he felt he needed more leisure time, in which to concentrate on broadcasting and raising, with his wife Phyllis, three growing sons. "I just didn't have any home life," he explained. Today Mrs. Marshall and the three boys feel that the home front situation hasn't improved at all noticeably. -- epw If this story has a moral, it is: " Leave well enough alone" Just look what happened to Kenzie " mad about-ants" McKenzie, who didn't... By Mark Clifton Illustrated by Kelly Freas a mad scientist hardly showed at all. To see him ambling down the street in loose jointed manner, with sandy hair uncombed, blue eyes looking vaguely beyond normal focus, you might think here was a young fellow dreaming over how his gal looked last night. It might never occur to you that he was thinking of -- ants. Of course, we fellows in the experimental lab all knew it, but Kenzie wasn't too hard to get along with. In fact, he could usually be counted on to pull us out of a technical hole. We put up with him through a certain fondness, maybe even a little pride. It gave us a harmless subject to talk about when security was too rigid on other things. Our Department Chief knew it, but Kenzie had solved quite a few knotty electronics problems. The Chief never has been too particular to see credit get back to the guy who earned it. We guessed he figured having Kenzie there was profitable to him. In fact, the little redhead in payroll told me the Chief was drawing quite a few bonus checks. Personnel probably didn't know about it. Kenzie's papers, buried deep in the files, wouldn't show it; because about the only question they had not asked us was, "Where do you stand on the matter of ants?" There was an unwritten law in the lab for nobody ever to mention insects, or even elderly female relatives. I guess that was why it wasn't mentioned to the new guy, name of Robert Pringle. This fellow Pringle worked along for a couple weeks and showed us he had the old know-how in his fingers. A capable tech, a good joe, and we thought we were lucky to get him. On this particular morning, it happened that Pringle was working at the bench next to Kenzie. Being a talented tech, like the rest of us, his mind naturally ran along more than one channel at the same time. I expect he was really surprised at the reaction he got when he shouted out to the room at large. "Hey, fellows," he yelled. "I got little green bugs on my roses. What do you do about it?" The silence made him look up from his work, and he couldn't help npticing we all stood there with clinched hands and gritted teeth. We were watching Kenzie, who snapped the juice off his soldering iron and pointed the iron at Pringle. "Those," said Kenzie in a hollow, impressive voice, "are aphis. If you will look closer, Pringle, you will see among them -- ants. The aphid is to the ant as the dairy cow is to the human. Those ants are aphid herders, carefully tending and milking their flock." "Here we go again," moaned one of the fellows across the lab. "The ants are a highly intelligent life form," Kenzie went on. "I would explain it to you in detail, but I am in the middle of a problem at this moment." "Thank heaven for that," another tech ground out the words. "Suffice it to say," Kenzie ignored all interruptions, "Man would well occupy himself trying to communicate with them." The Chief came to the doorway of his little office down at the end of the lab. He looked us all over patiently and knowingly. "Now give him your syllogism, Kenzie," he said quietly, "so we can all get back to work." "You may reflect on this, Pringle," Kenzie stated and waved his soldering iron in the air. "One: Man wants to communicate with intelligent life from other planets or the stars. "Two: We know from observation the ants communicate with one another. "Ergo : Before we reach so far as to contact extra terrestrial intelligence, had we not better occupy our time with solving a much simpler communications problem; to wit: communicate with the ants? How can we expect to solve communication with really alien beings from the stars, when we have not learned to communicate with the intelligent beings at our very feet?" All over the room we sighed heavily with relief. We knew the syllogism was the conclusion, the Sunday punch. The boy had really cut it short this time. Usually he was good for a solid hour with facts and figures about how ants built bridges and such stuff. We all looked at Pringle's face, expecting to see the embarrassed and sheepish grin. This was the usual reaction of a stranger when he first met up with Kenzie's syllogism. It horrified us to see, instead, his shining eyes. We heard him say enthusiastically. "That's just how I've always felt about it, Kenzie. It's a pleasure to meet a man who isn't afraid of thinking." "Oh, no-o-o!" we all groaned out in a chorus. "Only," Pringle said dubiously, and our hopes began to arise again. "Only I've been thinking more along the line of termites." Our hopes fell and were shattered. We heard the Chief moan to himself and saw him turn and almost run back into his office. "Two of 'em now," he was mumbling over and over. "Two of 'em now. It ain't worth it. It ain't worth it." He sat down heavily and buried his head in his arms across the top of his desk. Kenzie was watching him too, like he was wondering what had got into the Chief. Then Kenzie turned back to Pringle. "Ants," he said with determination. "Termites," Pringle answered him stubbornly. Kenzie glared at Pringle for a minute, then his face cleared. "Why not both of them?" he asked, like a fellow who was willing to be big about it. "Sure, why not?" Pringle came his half way also. Then, like he wasn't to be outdone in generosity. "Ants first, then termites later." Solemnly the two shook hands. They went back to their work at the bench, and there was an aura of understanding and accord at that end of the room thick enough to be felt. "I hope you insect lovers will be very happy together," the grid expert mumbled to their backs. The rest of us also settled back into our varied jobs and problems. But we worked as if we momentarily expected an earthquake to rock us. Our hands were not quite steady. Our eyes were not firm and piercing. We almost held our breaths. For a wonder, we agreed with the Chief. Two of 'em now. The days passed and nothing more was said. More than ever now, we enforced the taboo on insects. We didn't mention trees, or wood, or even the conditional subjunctive. Would sounded like wood. Wood might bring up the thought of termites. We could see the Chief was weighing the advantages of keeping them against the risks of upsetting the department constantly. As we expected, greed won. We knew he would not risk giving up the prestige and extra bonuses he got for Kenzie' s work. And he knew he had to keep those discoveries coming, because our management has a short memory of what a guy has done in the past. The Chief even let Kenzie have Pringle as his own personal tech. It served two purposes. It isolated them from the rest of us. It made Kenzie happy. I will say for the lads, they spent most of their time on Company problems, at first. But gradually, on one corner of Kenzie's bench, a gadget began to take shape. The two of them worked on it when there were no urgent, frantic, must-be-outtodaywithoutfail problems to be solved first. None of us could figure out the purpose of the mechanism. We knew if we couldn't figure it, the Chief couldn't. But we could practically see him rub his hands in glee when he thought of the extra bonus he might get for this new gadget. Of course the Chief wasn't a complete slouch as an electronics engineer. But it was a long time since he did his study, and he had grown hazy by spending too many years as an administrator. The word got around that for hours at a time, after we had gone home, the Chief would stand at Kenzie's bench. The way we reasoned it, he figured he ought to know something about the gadget when he took it in to Old Rock Jaw, and palmed it off as his latest discovery. We also reasoned that since we couldn't figure it, the Chief must have been an awfully troubled man. Obviously, it had something to do with microwave transmission and reception. There was the usual high-frequency condensor, the magnatron tubes, the tuning cavities. All company stock, of course. But then none of us ever worried about cost. That was the Chiefs problem. He didn't worry much about it either, except at budget time. Then there were screams of anguish from the front office over experimental requisitions. Every year, Old Rock Jaw promised to fire us all, if we didn't cut costs, but in a couple of weeks we always forgot about it. Trouble was, the Chief had been getting edgy about costs lately, so we knew it was about time for the annual budget battle. Significantly, he didn't say a word to Kenzie about the gadget. working late one night on a special permit. My bench is over in a wing of the lab, and I guess the Chief forgot I was around. I saw a very pretty scene. The Chief had built up a habit of staying late so he could stand and study over the Kenzie gadget. He never touched it, though. He knew enough not to bother anything, because we all knew how bitter Kenzie was when anybody touched his things. The Chief was standing there this evening when the General Manager, Old Rock Jaw, was showing some important personages through the plant after hours. They came through the lab door, and I saw scrambled eggs and fruit salad shining all over bulging uniforms. There was also one little, geezik in a pin-striped suit. Old Rock Jaw was talking, as usual... and it is from this room, gentlemen," he was saying, "That some of those revolutionary discoveries emanate!" Then he caught sight of the Chief, who had hastily picked up a cold soldering iron and was tentatively touching a random point on the new mechanism. "Ah-h!" Old Rock Jaw exclaimed with satisfaction. "Here is our chief scientist now. Still at work. He watches no clock, gentlemen, He knows no time. His whole life is wrapped up in his research!" The Chief didn't look around, but bent closer to the soldering point. He looked like he hoped they would limit their inspection to a cursory look about and then retire. I hoped they would too, I didn't want them to see me. But Old Rock Jaw, in more of a blowhard mood even than usual, couldn't let well enough alone. He came up close to the Chief, and looked over his shoulder at the mechanism. He was even more ignorant than the Chief, so I knew he wouldn't recognize any of it. "Don't let us disturb you, Alfred," he breathed in a hushed voice. "But could you tell the gentlemen what you are working on now?" He cleared his throat importantly and said, "I might add that everyone here has been security cleared, Alfred, so you may speak freely." The Chief still did not lift his eyes from his work. He didn't dare. He carefully turned an unconnected control knob a hairsbreadth with utmost deliberation and precision. "Multimicrofrequidometer," the Chief mumbled, and buried his head still deeper into the mechanism. "Ah yes, of course. But you have a new hook up," the General Manager bluffed. "I hardly recognized it at first. Startling!" he breathed. He looked around triumphantly at the impressed brass and braid. He looked pointedly at the pinstriped suit who probably controlled congressional purse strings. "Apparently he is at a point where he cannot divert his attention to us, gentlemen," he breathed in a hushed voice. He placed his fingers to his lips and began to tiptoe backwards toward the door. The beef trust in fancy uniform came up on their own toesies, and also tiptoed away from the genius scientist. By now, the genius was beginning to exude large drops of sweat. The door closed behind them, and the Chief dropped the cold soldering iron with a sigh of relief. He took hold of his tongue, where he must have been biting into it. He wiped his forehead and fingers with his breast-pocket handkerchief. Both the Chief and I heard the party walking down the hall and into another wing of the building. I still didn't make a sound. It would never do for the Chief to know he had been observed. After a suitable time, the Chief, also, tiptoed out of the lab, and he was mumbling to himself as I have never seen him mumble before. thing appeared on Kenzie's work bench. This time it was a large rectangular glass aquarium. It was filled with moist earth. Now here was something new in electronics! We shook our heads. One of the techs, who fancied himself a psychologist, said the boys were suffering from retrogressive dementia. They had gone so far back into childhood, they had to play sand box. The Chief overheard the tech, and spoke up plaintively. "But I don't see any celluloid spade and bucket," he said. He seemed relieved when we burst out laughing. His relief didn't last long, however. It changed to more worry when he saw the boys carefully sprinkling bread and meat crumbs over the surface of the sand. Then on top of that they dropped moist bits of cake icing. When Pringle brought down a marigold plant, all covered with aphis, and transplanted it in a comer of the aquarium, the Chief again ran into his office and began to hold his head in his hands. More days passed. The gadget became a bristling porcupine of test clips. By now the boys had forgotten they were working for the Company and spent practically all their time on the whoozits. The Chief became so fascinated, in a kind of horror-stricken manner, that he did not mention the aquarium to Kenzie at all. The rest of us also kept away from that side of the lab. Ever since Kenzie had started on the gadget, he had no time for us, or helping us with our problems. If we spoke to him he snapped back at us, until I guess all our noses were out of joint. By the time the aquarium appeared, we were ignoring him and everything he did. In a few more weeks the aquarium was swarming with ants. It was easy to see their tunnels running up and down the sides of the glass. I will say this for the boys. They set it in a huge pan of water. None of us could legitimately squawk about getting ants mixed up with our anatomy. The Chief showed he was mixed with disappointment and elation when the boys asked clearance to work nights in the lab. Disappointed since he could no longer stay late and follow the progress; elated because the boys must really be getting hot. Annual budget time was getting closer, and we could see the wheels going around in his mind. It would be a nice thing if he could deliver the multiwhoozits gadget just before the big fight for appropriations. As far as we knew, the only interest the General Manager had shown was the time he asked the Chief in the hall how that multiwhoozits was coming along. Even in that question, it was evident Old Rock Jaw was asking out of a rare politeness only -- there being no big shots around to impress. It was doubtful if the G.M. heard the Chief's vague answer, because the old boy was mumbling to himself about rising costs and having to cut down expenses. He waddled on down the hall. He was still mumbling as he went, but both the Chief and I heard one sentence clearly. "And certain salaries and bonuses will have to be cut." The Chief turned pale. So he granted Kenzie' s request with alacrity -- and hoped he would finish the gadget in time. For two more weeks the Chief waited patiently, or maybe impatiently. He knew the boys were working every night, because the security police complained about their pinochle game being interrupted to let Kenzie and Pringle in and out. Both the boys began to get a feverish look in their faces. Their cheeks grew hollow. Their eyes were bloodshot. Their regular work suffered even more. The Chief thought he was being considerate when he lifted some of their work and shoved it over to the rest of us. We were already sore at the boys and we didn't take it too kindly. Just the same, we didn't let our squawk get beyond the walls of the lab. No use letting that nosy Personnel Department get an excuse to start holding hands, patting on the back, and radiating aid and comfort to all. Then -- a certain Monday came. as usual. Some of the newer guys pretended to be busy, but we were all watching to see what he would do. There is a back door to the Chiefs office which he seldom uses and which he always keeps locked. But it opens into the lab wing right at my table. It wasn't my fault, in fiddling around a little with the lock, it came unstuck and the door opened a little so I could hear what went on. When the Chief came in, both the boys were busy dismantling the gadget. Discouragement and hopelessness were written all over their faces, in the dejected slope of their shoulders, in the lackadaisical movements of their arms. Piece by piece, through the glass partition of his office wall, the Chief watched the gadget being taken apart. Each piece was carefully taken back and placed in stock for re-use. That alone was enough to create great alarm for their sanity. Imagine a technician putting a piece back to be used over! Finally the Chief could bear it no longer. He called them into his office. He carefully shut the door, but he didn't notice the back door swung open a little farther. I found it necessary to work close to the crack, and if I turned around, I could get a good view of the entire office. The Chief waved the boys into chairs across from his desk. He sat down and placed his fingertips together. Even then, I could see his hands were shaking. He leaned forward and asked with careful sympathy in his voice. "Didn't it work?" "Yeah," Kenzie answered in a bored voice. "It worked." I was surprised at Kenzie's voice. Usually he talked with the concise enunciation of a professor. Now he sounded like maybe just a good lab tech. "Then why are you dismantling it?" the Chief asked with a worried frown. "It wouldn't be good for people to know about it," Pringle burst out. "I don't understand," the Chief faltered. Then desperately, "Look, fellows. I've given you a lotta leeway. You've sluffed your work something terrible. That's all right to an extent. I've covered for you." "Thanks, Chief," Kenzie said drily. "But Old Rock -- er -- the General Manager," the Chief complained, "knows I've been working on something. Now what with budgets coming on, and all, I gotta have something to show!" "You've been working on something -- " Pringle exclaimed. "I mean my department has," the Chief covered himself hastily. "I'm responsible for what goes on in my department, you know. I gotta have some kind of an explanation." He was almost wailing now. "What with budgets coming on, and all." "Make up your own explanation," Kenzie answered disinterestedly. "It's a cinch you can't give out with the real one." The Chief began to wheedle. "You two boys know the explanation. Why can't you tell me? This is your Chief who's talking, boys. The one who has always stood by you and covered for you. Remember? You just gotta tell me, boys." I saw Pringle and Kenzie look at one another. "I guess he's right, Ken," Pringle said. "That is, if he promises never to tell anybody." "Yeah. I guess so." Kenzie nodded his head in agreement. "We owe him that much for just letting us alone." The Chief let out a big sigh of relief. "It's about ants," Kenzie began. "Now, now, Kenzie boy," the Chief interrupted hurriedly. "Let's stay on the subject, shall we? Let's not get off on that tangent again, Kenzie boy. Shall we?" "Nuts," Kenzie said. "But this is about ants, Chief," Pringle answered. Then shrewdly, "But first you gotta promise, Chief." "All right, I promise," the Chief acceded testily. "It's about ants," Kenzie repeated stubbornly. The Chief winced, but he held his peace. "They're intelligent," Kenzie said profoundly, and stopped. "I know," the Chief prompted. "I know, Kenzie boy. You've been saying that all along." "I communicated with them," Kenzie said flatly. "You what?" The Chiefs eyes bugged out. I guess mine did too. "Sure," Kenzie answered. "After a fashion, that is. In their anthers they've got a chitin cell diaphragm. Modified cellular structure. They communicate with a sort of microwave. Roughly you might say it generates and radiates like our brain wave. Roughly, very roughly. This chitin diaphragm picks up the microwave like our ears pick up sound. Roughly, that is." "But that's wonderful," the Chief glowed. It didn't take much imagination to see him in the General Manager's office explaining how his multiwhoozits gadget worked. Maybe nothing immediately commercial about it, but when the publicity office got hold of it -- man, it would mean plenty of free publicity for the Company. And how Old Rock Jaw loved free publicity! "We tuned in on them," Kenzie was saying. "By putting different kinds of food around, and by making different kinds of disturbances, we worked out a crude sort of vocabulary." "You did -- " the Chief exclaimed. "Nothing fancy, you understand," Kenzie belittled his achievement. "But enough so when we broadcast a sugar wave, they came running to the surface to see where it was. When we broadcast a water wave, they rushed to the ant nursery and started carrying eggs to high ground." "Glory be -- " the Chief breathed. In his eyes there was the vision of world renowned scientists patting him on the back. Maybe even more important, Old Rock Jaw was actually smiling, and telling him he could have unlimited funds in his budget. "Sure," Kenzie said bitterly. "Sure that was all very fine. Big shots, we were going to be, Pringle and me. First time in history man had talked with an insect. Maybe even get our pictures in the paper, same as if we'd murdered somebody. Fame!" "Yeah," Pringle chimed in. "First step in learning how to communicate with an alien mind. Nuts!" "I don't get it," the Chief stammered. "What's wrong with that?" "Well, we went on perfecting the vocabulary," Kenzie said. "You know. Fining it down. Had the little beggars practically standing on their heads at times with our wave." He grinned at the memory and seemed to shake off some of his lethargy. "You shoulda been here the night Pringle had them marching in formation." His face fell again. "We kept on improving the gadget," he said with hangdog attitude. "We still hadn't made direct communication, you understand. Nothing like 'How do you do, Mrs. Ant? This is Kenzie MacKenzie, human, talking.' " Then he sneered at his memory. "With our microwave we could make them do things. But hell, you can make them run out of the ground by pouring water down their hole. That's not communication! We couldn't seem to contact them direct -- make them know we were communicating." "But you still -- " the Chief said. He had visions of every home using a gadget to broadcast "keep away" signals to ant pests. "Our gadget was still crude at that point," Kenzie interrupted. "We fined it down, more and more. That's when we began to pick up the star static." "Star static?" the Chief faltered. "He wouldn't know about that," Pringle said, and I could detect contempt in his voice, even if the Chief didn't. "Sure he would," Kenzie corrected. "Everybody knows about the fifty or so stars that send out continuous radio signals, and how we've been trying for years to unscramble them." "Why certainly," the Chief said, so positively I knew he hadn't heard of it before. "Anyway," Kenzie said. "The more we worked out the vocabulary code, the more the star signals began to fit right into it. So we decided to break up the thing, and forget all about ants. Honest Chief, you'll never hear me mention the word again." "Termites either," Pringle chimed in. "But I still don't understand," the Chief complained. "It still all sounds marvelous. I just don't understand." "Draw him a picture," Pringle said disgustedly. "Okay," Kenzie acceded. "How many years would you say ants have been on earth, Chief?" "Oh, I don't know," the Chief answered. "Quite a few, I'd say." "Yeah," Kenzie . said drily. Unchanged. A perfect life form with a perfect civilization. So perfect, nature hasn't seen any need to "So what?" the Chief asked. "They're nothing. We come along and make them do nip ups." "Yeah," Kenzie was bitter again. "We humans go around talking about how brave and smart we are. How someday we might even get so smart we'll contact other intelligent races on other worlds. Yeah, we're smart. You know those star radiations?" "That's not my specialty, you know," the Chief answered cautiously. "Some of those radiations started out from their home planet a million light years ago," Pringle said quietly. "So what again?" the Chief asked. "Those radiations," Kenzie said, "happen to be communications between the galaxies -- beamed at the ants. Sort of a continuous radio program broadcast universe wide. It happens the ants, maybe termites, maybe other insects, are spread through all the galaxies. It happens they are the dominant intelligent race throughout the universe." He shrugged in disgust. "Us big brave humans," he said contemptuously. "Someday we might even reach Mars. Hell, those ants have been colonizing for hunstill communicating. They are the real intelligence on the earth!" He crushed a cigarette fiercely into a glass ash tray on the desk. "Only thing man has got, or ever had, was his ego. He's got to believe he's top dog, or else he folds and quits. Yeah, we're smart all right. Hell, we're so far down the scale the ants don't even recognize us as a life form at all." Pringle nodded soberly. "Yeah," he said to the Chief, "how would you like to explain a gadget that proved ants have more brains than you have?" The Chief looked at them with incredulous eyes. He was still staring at them silently, with a bloodless face, when the office messenger came in and told him the General Manager wished to see him in his office to discuss budgets. I closed the back office door quietly and went back to work. The other guys clustered around and wanted to know what I heard. "Nothing," I said, and looked them straight in the eye. "Nothing at all." propriations committee for nothing. He had an eye for results, and right now that eye was sharper than ever. for space. His final report?... Well, maybe you'd better Apostolides in the next issue! It is rumored that technology might eliminate many useless items from our regulated life of the future -- including good, old-fashioned sex. However, let's kibitz for a moment... By Gene Hunter slow, cumbersome train. He disliked using this uncomfortable means of travel, but since he wanted to learn more about these strange creatures who were his ancestors, he had decided to try to become used to their ways. He was lonely in this strange, backward age and when he unexpectedly saw another being like himself in the same coach, he hastened to make his presence known. He introduced himself and asked politely : "When are you from?" "#," the other replied. self," Kial said. "Just a country boy. But # -- that's only a period ahead of my own time. Maybe you could tell me..." "Ah, ah!" the other admonished. "Remember the First Law of Thek!" "Oh, Center," Kial grumbled. "I know: 'One may not divulge any scientific, technical or social information to anyone from his own past whom he may meet at an equidistant point in a Thek-travel.' I forgot." "Bad," Broyk said. Then he added, almost jokingly: "You wouldn't want to be marooned in this dismal era, would you?" Kial shuddered. "Of course not. But the Laws seem so ridiculous." "Not a bit," Broyk said, warming up to the subject. "It's very simple, really. Same principle that doesn't allow anyone to Thektravel into the future. "Look. I'm from #. Say that I went into #, where I memorized as much information as I could on some subject such as medicine. So I return to #, retaining all such knowledge in my mind that's been learned in four periods. Therefore, I'd have knowledge that wasn't dreamed of in my own time, but was discovered sometime during the next four peripds. But then it couldn't be discovered. because I'd brought it back to # and -- well, I'm no Logician, but you see my point." "Oh, it's reasonable, I suppose," Kial admitted. "I realize the Laws are really for our own good. By the way -- Pm here on a field trip to gather material for my thesis on Advanced Therapeutical Psychology and its development since the Twentieth Century. What phase of this era are you here to study?" "I -- Fm afraid I couldn't tell you that," Broyk said. "It's of rather a secret nature and..." "You mean we might violate a Law and be stuck here for good -- is that it?" "Yes -- in a way." Frightened, Kial let the matter drop. His gaze wandered through the coach, examining the other passengers with interest. As time travelers from a different spacetime plane from their #th Century ancestors, he and Broyk were naturally invisible to their fellow travelers. Two pompous old gentlemen were lighting cigars and Kial was about to remark on the habit of smoking when he noticed an even more remarkable phenomenon. A few seats ahead of them sat a goodlooking young couple, oblivious to others about them. "Look!" Kial cried excitedly. "Lovers! Honey mooners! I've read about such things! Isn't it disgusting?" "Oh, I don't know," Broyk said, a little wistfully. "I sometimes think it was a mistake for Center to do away with sex. It must have been interesting." "Atavist!" Kial snapped in horror. Had his peoples' emotional make-up provided for blushing, Kial would undoubtedly have turned beet-red. Broyk's words had caused him acute embarrassment. strange companion, he suddenly began to feel a sensation he had often heard about but never before had experienced. Terror and dismay filled him as he sought to throw off the probing finger that was penetrating his mind. He looked at Broyk. There was the faintest notion of a smile on the other's face as he said: "Yes, Kial -- I am a Telepath." Kial's mind reeled. He felt himself on the brink of some gigantic abyss and then, as suddenly as it had come, the searching sensation faded away. "Since you are unable to enter my mind," Broyk said calmly, "it's only fair that I tell you about myself. You were right -- I'm an atavist. Even in period #, such things can happen. Always such creatures are destroyed after their first psychotests, but my case was different. The Controller who bred me was only a dabbler in such things. I was a failure, but he took a fancy to me. I was allowed to mature secretly -- few people knew of my existence. When I reached my majority my presence became dangerous and I was sent back into time to try and find the proper place for myself. And I think I've found it -- here!" Kial was a very amazed young man. "But such a barbarous age," he complained. "Sex and atom bombs and everything..." "Remember," Broyk smiled, "these people are the forebears of the geniuses who created Center and the Galactic Empire. They'll survive, despite their barbarism. The existence of Center is proof." "It's rather horrible to contemplate," Kial said thoughtfully, calmer now, "and yet, this might really be a great age. In a way I almost envy you." "Of course you do," Broyk said. "You have certain tendencies -- they bother you, although you manage to hide them well. I discovered them when I took the liberty of telepathing you. Artificial Genetics isn't perfect, even in our time -- perhaps because we originally sprang from man. Perhaps we'll never be quite perfect, because of that, even after thousands of periods of breeding." Kial took another look at the loving young couple. "It -- it might be fun, after all." Broyk laughed. "You needn't envy me at all, you know." Kial frowned. "I'm telling you about myself," Broyk went on, "I have also told you of a specific condition existing a period ahead of your own time. Remember the First Law?" "Center!" "We're marooned in the Twentieth Century. You have to accept it." "But what will we do ?" Kial's mind was reeling again. "Since we've already broken the First Law," Broyk said, "we may just as well break the Second: 'No Thek-traveler may enter the body of a native of a foreign spacetime...' " The young lovers kissed again and this time there seemed to be an added zest, even to their passionate embrace. (Continued from page #) ings. (For the record, it wasn't -- though it's still considerable and Bloomsbury will never be quite the same to me again.) A huge crowd there in the middle of it were Mays and Marianne. It ended up with us having a very pleasant lunch together in Holborn. I'll say this about Mays -- he was very pleasant and treated the affair on Five as a huge joke. And Marianne was pretty as she could be. She laughed too. But I'm still rather sore about Marianne. "Frankly, I can't imagine what she sees in him . m m t'  # V.Vv'AiVi' Aji'i f i mSi I  m . I '  I i  jCw: B ', piil teiiwS What was the mystery of this great ship from the dark, deep reaches of space? For, within its deathfilled chambers -- was the avenue of life! By Alan E. Nourse Illustrated by Ed Emsh mand, sat bolt upright in his bunk, blinking wide-eyed at the darkness. The alarm was screaming through the Satellite Station, its harsh, nervejarring clang echoing and re-echoing down the metal corridors, penetrating every nook and crevice and cubicle of the lonely outpost, screaming incredibly through the dark sleeping period. Sabo shook the sleep from his eyes, and then a panic of fear burst into his mind. The alarm! Tumbling out of his bunk in the darkness, he crashed into the far bulkhead, staggering giddily in the impossible gravity as he pawed about for his magnaboots, his heart pounding fiercely in his ears. The alarm! Impossible, after so long, after these long months of bitter waiting -- In the corridor he collided with Brownie, looking like a frightened gnome, and he growled profanity as he raced down the corridor for the Central Control. Frightened eyes turned to him as he blinked at the bright lights of the room. The voices rose in a confused, anxious babble, and he shook his head and swore, and ploughed through them toward the screen. "Kill that damned alarm!" he roared, blinking as he counted faces.' "Somebody get the Skipper out of his sack, pronto, and stop that clatter! What's the trouble?" The radioman waved feebly at the view screen, shimmering on the great side panel. "We just picked it   up -- It was a ship, moving in from beyond Saturn's rings, a huge, gray-black blob in the silvery screen, moving in toward the Station with ponderous, clumsy grace, growing larger by the second as it sped toward them. Sabo felt the fear spill over in his mind, driving out all thought, and he sank into the control chair like a well-trained automaton. His gray eyes were wide, trained for long military years to miss nothing; his fingers moved over the panel with deft skill. "Get the men to stations," he growled, "and will somebody kindly get the Skipper down here, if he can manage to take a minute." "I'm right here." The little graying man was at his elbow, staring at the screen with angry red eyes. "Who told you to shut off the alarm?" "Nobody told me. Everyone was here, and it was getting on my nerves." "What a shame." Captain Loomis' voice was icy. "I give orders on this Station," he said smoothly, "and you'll remember it." He scowled at the great gray ship, looming closer and closer. "What's its course?" "Going to miss us by several thousand kilos at least. Look at that thing! It's traveling " "Contact it! This is what we've been waiting for." The captain's voice was hoarse. Sabo spun a dial, and cursed. "No luck. Can't get through. It's passing us -- " "Then grapple it, stupid! You want me to wipe your nose, too?" Sabo's face darkened angrily. With slow precision he set the servo fixes on the huge gray hulk looming up in the viewer, and then snapped the switches sharply. Two small servos shoved their blunt noses from the landing port of the Station, and slipped silently into space alongside. Then, like a pair of trained dogs, they sped on their beams straight out from the Station toward the approaching ship. The intruder was dark, moving at tremendous velocity past the Station, as though unaware of its existence. The servos moved out, and suddenly diverged and reversed, twisting in long arcs to come alongside the strange ship, finally moving in at the same velocity on either side. There was a sharp flash of contact power; then, like a mammoth slowmotion monster, the ship jerked in midspace and turned a graceful end-for-end arc as the servo-grapplers gripped it like leeches and whined, glowing ruddy with the jolting power flowing through them. Sabo watched, hardly breathing, until the great ship spun and slowed and stopped. Then it reversed direction, and the servos led it triumphantly back toward the landing port of the Station. Sabo glanced at the radioman, a frown creasing his forehead. "Still nothing?" "Not a peep." He stared out at the great ship, feeling a chill of wonder and fear crawl up his spine. "So this is the mysterious puzzle of Saturn," he muttered. "This is what we've been waiting for." There was a curious eager light in Captain Loomis' eyes as he looked up. "Oh, no. Not this." "What?" "Not this. The ships we've seen before were tiny, flat." His little eyes turned toward the ship, and back to Sabo's heavy face. "This is something else, something quite different." A smile curved his lips, and he rubbed his hands together. "We go out for trout and come derelict back with a whale. This ship's from space, deep space. Not from Saturn. This one's from the stars." the side of the Satellite Station, silent as a tomb, still gently rotating as the Station slowly spun in its orbit around Saturn. In the captain's cabin the men shifted restlessly, uneasily facing the eager eyes of their captain. The old man paced the floor of the cabin, his white hair mussed, his face red with excitement. Even his carefully calm face couldn't conceal the eagerness burning in his eyes as he faced the crew. "Still no contact?" he asked Sparks. The radioman shook his head anxiously. "Not a sign. I've tried every signal I know at every wave frequency that could possibly reach them. I've even tried a dozen frequencies that couldn't possibly reach them, and I haven't stirred them up a bit. They just aren't answering." Captain Loomis swung on the group of men. "All right, now, I want you to get this straight. This is our catch. We don't know what's aboard it, and we don't know where it came from, but it's our prize. That means not a word goes back home about it until we've learned all there is to learn. We're going to get the honors on this one, not some eager Admiral back home -- " The men stirred uneasily, worried eyes seeking Sabo's face in alarm. "What about the law?" growled Sabo. "The law says everything must be reported within two hours." "Then we'll break the law," the captain snapped. "I'm captain of this Station, and those are your orders. You don't need to worry about the law -- I'll see that you're protected, but this is too big to fumble. This ship is from the stars. That means it must have an Interstellar drive. You know what that means. The Government will fall all over itself to reward us -- " Sabo scowled, and the worry deepened in the men's faces. It was hard to imagine the Government falling all over itself for anybody. They knew too well how the Government worked. They had heard of the swift trials, the harsh imprisonments that awaited even the petty infringers. The Military Government had no time to waste on those who stepped out of line, they had no mercy to spare. And the men knew that their captain was not in favor in top Government circles. Crack patrol commanders were not shunted into remote, lifeless Satellite Stations if their stand in the Government was high. And deep in their minds, somehow, the men knew .they couldn't trust this little, sharp-eyed, white-haired man. The credit for such a discovery as this might go to him, yes -- but there would be little left for them. "The law -- " Sabo repeated stubbornly. "Damn the law! We're stationed out here in this limbo to watch Saturn and report any activity we see coming from there. There's nothing in our orders about anything else. There have been ships from there, they think, but not this ship. trying to find an Interstellar, and never gotten to first base." The captain paused, his eyes narrowing. "We'll go aboard this ship," he said softly. "We'll find out what's aboard it, and where it's from, and we'll take its drive. There's been no resistance yet, but it could be dangerous. We can't assume anything. The boarding party will report everything they find to me. One of them will have to be a drive man. That's you, Brownie." The little man with the sharp black eyes looked up eagerly. "I don't know if I could tell anything -- " "You can tell more than anyone else here. Nobody else knows space drive. I'll count on you. If you bring back a good report, perhaps we can cancel out certain -- unfortunate items in your record. But one other should board with you -- " His eyes turned toward John Sabo. "Not me. This is your goat." The mate's eyes were sullen. "This is gross breach, and you know it. They'll have you in irons when we get back. I don't want anything to do with it." "You're under orders, Sabo. You keep forgetting." "They're illegal orders, sir!" "I'll take responsibility for that." Sabo looked the old man straight in the eye. "You mean you'd sell us down a rat hole to save your skin. That's what you mean." Captain Loomis' eyes widened incredulously. Then his face darkened, and he stepped very close to the big man. "You'll watch your tongue, I think," he gritted. "Be careful what you say to me, Sabo. Be very careful. Because if you don't, you'll be in irons, and we'll see just how long you last when you get back home. Now you've got your orders. You'll board the ship with Brownie." The big man's fists were clenched until the knuckles were white. "You don't know what's over there!" he burst out. "We could be slaughtered." The captain's smile was unpleasant. "That would be such a pity," he murmured. "I'd really hate to see it happen -- " lent, like a shadowy ghost. No flicker of light could be seen aboard it; no sound nor faintest sign of life came from the tall, dark hull plates. It hung there, huge and imponderable, and swung around with the Station in its silent orbit. The men huddled about Sabo and Brownie, helping them into their pressure suits, checking their equipment. They had watched the little scanning beetles crawl over the surface of the great ship, examining, probing every nook and crevice, reporting crystals, and metals, and irons, while the boarding party prepared. And still the radioman waited alertly for a flicker of life from the solemn giant. Frightened as they were of their part in the illegal secrecy, the arrival of the ship had brought a change in the crew, lighting fires of excitement in their eyes. They moved faster, their voices were lighter, more cheerful. Long months on the Station had worn on derelict their nerves -- out of contact with their homes, on a mission that was secretly jeered as utter Governmental folly. Ships had been seen, years before, disappearing into the sullen bright atmospheric crust of Saturn, but there had been no sign of anything since. And out there, on the lonely guard Station, nerves had run ragged, always waiting, always watching, wearing away even the iron discipline of their military background. They grew bitterly weary of the same faces, the same routine, the constant repetition of inactivity. And through the months they had watched with increasing anxiety the conflict growing between the captain and his bitter, sulleneyed second-in-command, John Sabo. And then the ship had come, incredibly, from the depths of space, and the tensions of loneliness were forgotten in the flurry of activity. The locks whined and opened as the two men moved out of the Station on the little propulsion sleds, linked to the Station with light silk guy ropes. Sabo settled himself on the sled, cursing himself for falling so foolishly into the captain's scheme, cursing his tongue for wandering. And deep within him he felt a new sensation, a vague uneasiness and insecurity that he had not felt in all his years of military life. The strange ship was a variant, an imponderable factor thrown suddenly into his small world of hatred and bitterness, forcing him into unknown territory, throwing his mind into a welter of doubts and fears. He glanced uneasily across at Brownie, vaguely wishing that someone else were with him. Brownie was a troublemaker, Brownie talked too much, Brownie philosophized in a world that ridiculed philosophy. He'd known men like Brownie before, and he knew that they couldn't be trusted. The gray hull gleamed at them as they moved toward it, a monstrous wall of polished metal. There were no dents, no surface scars from its passage through space. They found the entrance lock without difficulty, near the top of the ship's great hull, and Brownie probed the rim of the lock with a dozen instruments, his dark eyes burning eagerly. And then, with a squeal that grated in Sabo's ears, the oval port of the ship quivered, and slowly opened. Silently, the sleds moved into the opening. They were in a small vault, quite dark, and the sleds settled slowly onto a metal deck. Sabo eased himself from the seat, tuning up his audios to their highest sensitivity, moving over to Brownie. Momentarily they touched helmets, and Brownie's excited voice came to him, muted, but breathless. "No trouble getting it open. It worked on the same principle as ours." "Better get to work on the inner lock." Brownie shot him a sharp glance. "But what about -- inside? I mean, we can't just walk in on them -- " "Why not? We've tried to contact them." Reluctantly, the little engineer began probing the inner lock with trembling fingers. Minutes later they were easing themselves through, moving slowly down the dark corridor, waiting with pounding hearts for a sound, a sign. The corridor joined another, and then still another, until they reached a great oval door. And then they were inside, in the heart of the ship, and their eyes widened as they stared at the thing in the center of the great vaulted chamber. "My God!" Brownie's voice was a hoarse whisper in the stillness. "Look at them, Johnny!" Sabo moved slowly across the room toward the frail, crushed form lying against the great, gleaming panel. Thin, almost boneless arms were pasted against the hard metal; an oval, humanoid skull was crushed like an eggshell into the knobs and levers of the control panel. Sudden horror shot through the big man as he looked around. At the far side of the room was another of the things, and still another, mashed, like lifeless jelly, into the floors and panels. Gently he peeled a bit of jelly away from the metal, then turned with a mixture of wonder and disgust. "All dead," he muttered. Brownie looked up at him, his hands trembling. "No wonder there was no sign." He looked about helplessly. "It's a derelict, Johnny. A wanderer. How could it have happened? How long ago?" Sabo shook his head, bewildered. "Then it was just chance that it came to us, that we saw it -- " "No pilot, no charts. It might have wandered for centuries." Brownie stared about the room, a frightened look on his face. And then he was leaning over the control panel, probing at the array of levers, his fingers working eagerly at the wiring. Sabo nodded approvingly. "We'll have to go over it with a comb," he said. "I'll see what I can find in the rest of the ship. You go ahead on the controls and drive." Without waiting for an answer he moved swiftly from the round chamber, out into the corridor again, his stomach almost sick. It took them many hours. They moved silently, as if even a slight sound might disturb the sleeping alien forms, smashed against the dark metal panels. In another room were the charts, great, beautiful charts, totally unfamiliar, studded with star formations he had never seen, noted with curious, meaningless symbols. As Sabo worked he heard Brownie moving down into the depths of the ship, toward the giant engine rooms. And then, some silent alarm clicked into place in Sabo's mind, tightening his stomach, screaming to be heard. Heart pounding, he dashed down the corridor like a cat, seeing again in his mind the bright, eager eyes of the engineer. Suddenly the meaning of that eagerness dawned on him. He scampered down a ladder, along a corridor, and down another ladder, down to the engine room, almost colliding with Brownie as he crossed from one of the engines to a battery of generators on the far side of the room. "Brownie!" "What's the trouble?" Sabo trembled, then turned away. "Nothing," he muttered. "Just a thought." But he watched as the little man snaked into the labyrinth of dynamos and coils and wires, peering eagerly, probing, searching, making notes in the litderelict tie pad in his hand. Finally, hours later, they moved again toward the lock where they had left their sleds. Not a word passed between them. The uneasiness was strong in Sabo's mind now, growing deeper, mingling with fear and a premonition of impending evil. A dead ship, a derelict, come to them by merest chance from some unthinkably remote star. He cursed, without knowing why, and suddenly he felt he hated Brownie as much as he hated the captain waiting for them in the Station. But as he stepped into the Station's lock, a new thought crossed his mind, almost dazzling him with its unexpectedness. He looked at the engineer's thin face, and his hands were trembling as he opened the pressure suit. longer than was necessary to give his report to the captain, dwelling on unimportant details, watching with malicious amusement the captain's growing annoyance. Captain Loomis' eyes kept sliding to Brownie, as though trying to read the information he wanted from the engineer's face. Sabo rolled up the charts slowly, stowing them in a pile on the desk. 'That's the picture, sir. Perhaps a qualified astronomer could make something of it; I haven't the knowledge or the instruments. The ship came from outside the system, beyond doubt. Probably from a planet with lighter gravity than our own, judging from the frailty of the creatures. Oxygen breathers, from the looks of their gas storage. If you ask me, I'd say -- " "All right, all right," the captain breathed impatiently. "You can write it up and hand it to me. It isn't really important where they came from, or whether they breathe oxygen or fluorine." He turned his eyes to the engineer, and lit a cigar with trembling fingers." The important thing is how they got here. The drive, Brownie. You went over the engines carefully? What did you find?" Brownie twitched uneasily, and looked at the floor. "Oh, yes, I examined them carefully. Wasn't too hard. I examined every piece of drive machinery on the ship, from stem to stem." Sabo nodded, slowly, watching the little man with carefully blank face. "That's right. You gave it a good going over." Brownie licked his lips. "It's a derelict, like Johnny told you. They were dead. All of them. Probably had been dead for a long time. I couldn't tell, of course. Probably nobody could tell. But they must have been dead for centuries -- " The captain's eyes blinked as the implication sank in. "Wait a minute," he said. "What do you mean, centuries?" Browrfie stared at his shoes. "The atomic piles were almost dead," he muttered in an apologetic whine. "The ship wasn't going any place, captain. It was just wandering. Maybe it's wandered for thousands of years." He took a deep breath, and his eyes met the captain's for a brief agonized moment. "They don't have Interstellar, sir. Just plain, simple, slow atomics. Nothing different. They've been traveling for centuries, and it would have taken them just as long to get back. The captain's voice was thin, choked. "Are you trying to tell me that their drive is no different from our own? That a ship has actually wandered into Interstellar space without a space drive?" Brownie spread his hands helplessly. "Something must have gone wrong. They must have started off for another planet in their own system, and something went wrong. They broke into space, and they all died. And the ship just went on moving. They never intended an Interstellar hop. They couldn't have. They didn't have the drive for it." The captain sat back numbly, his face pasty gray. The light had faded in his eyes now; he sat as though he'd been struck. "You -- you couldn't be wrong? You couldn't have missed anything?" Brownie's eyes shifted unhappily, and his voice was very faint. "No,  jj sir. The captain stared at them for a long moment, like a stricken child. Slowly he picked up one of the charts, his mouth working. Then, with a bitter roar, he threw it in Sabo's face. "Get out of here! Take this garbage and get out! And get the men to their stations. We're here to watch Saturn, and by god, we'll watch Saturn!" He turned away, a hand over his eyes, and derelict they heard his choking breath as they left the cabin. Slowly, Brownie walked out into the corridor, started down toward his cabin, with Sabo silent at his heels. He looked up once at the mate's heavy face, a look of pleading in his dark brown eyes, and then opened the door to his quarters. Like a cat, Sabo was in the room before him, dragging him in, slamming the door. He caught the little man by the neck with one savage hand, and shoved him unceremoniously against the door, his voice a vicious whisper. "All right , talk! Let's have it now!" Brownie choked, his eyes bulging, his face turning gray in the dim light of the cabin. "Johnny! Let me down! What's the matter? You're choking me, Johnny -- " The mate's eyes were red, with heavy lines of disgust and bitterness running from his eyes and the corners of his mouth. "You stinking little liar! Talk, damn it! You're not messing with the captain now, you're messing with me, and I'll have the truth if I have to cave in your skull -- " "I told you the truth! I don't know what you mean -- " Sabo's palm smashed into his face, jerking his head about like an apple on a string. "That's the wrong answer," he grated. "I warn you, don't lie! The captain is an ambitious ass, he couldn't think his way through a multiplication table. He's a little child. But I'm not quite so dull." He threw the little man down in a heap, his eyes blazing. "You silly fool, your story is so full of holes you could drive a tank through it. They just up and died, did they? I'm supposed to believe that? Smashed up against the panels the way they were? Only one thing could crush them like that. Any fool could see it. Acceleration. And I don't mean atomic acceleration. Something else." He glared down at the man quivering on the floor. "They had Interstellar drive, didn't they, Brownie?" Brownie nodded his head, weakly, almost sobbing, trying to pull himself erect. "Don't tell the captain," he sobbed. "Oh, Johnny, for god's sake, listen to me, don't let him know I lied. I was going to tell you anyway, Johnny, really I was. I've got a plan, a good plan, can't you see it?" The gleam of excitement came back into the sharp little eyes. "They had it, all right. Their trip probably took just a few months. They had a drive I've never seen before, non-atomic. I couldn't tell the principle, with the look I had, but I think I could work it." He sat up, his whole body trembling. "Don't give me away, Johnny, listen a minute -- " Sabo sat back against the bunk, staring at the little man. "You're out of your mind," he said softly. "You don't know what you're doing. What are you going to do when his Nibs goes over for a look himself? He's stupid, but not that stupid." Brownie's voice choked, his words tumbling over each other in his eagerness. "He won't get a chance to see it, Johnny. He's got to take our word until he sees it, and we can stall him -- " Sabo blinked. "A day or so -- maybe. But what then? Oh, how could you be so stupid? He's on the skids, he's out of favor and fighting for his life. That drive is the break that could put him on top. Can't you see he's selfish? He has to be, in this world, to get anything. Anything or anyone who blocks him, he'll destroy, if he can. Can't you see that? When he spots this, your life won't be worth spitting at." Brownie was trembling as he sat down opposite the big man. His voice was harsh in the little cubicle, heavy with pain and hopelessness. "That's right," he said. "My life isn't worth a nickle. Neither is yours. Neither is anybody's, here or back home. Nobody's life is worth a nickle. Something's happened to us in the past hundred years, Johnny -- something horrible. I've seen it creeping and growing up around us all my life. People don't matter any more, it's the Government, what the Government thinks that matters. It's a web, a cancer that grows in its own pattern, until it goes so far it can't be stopped. Men like Loomis could see the pattern, and adapt to it, throw away all the worthwhile things, the love and beauty and peace that we once had in our lives. Those men can get somewhere, they can turn this life into a climbing game, waiting their chance to get a little farther toward the top, a little closer to some semblance of security -- " "Everybody adapts to it," Sabo snapped. "They have to. You don't see me moving for anyone else, do you? I'm for me, and believe me I know it. I don't give a hang for you, or Loomis, or anyone else alive -- just me. I want to stay alive, that's all. You're a dreamer, Brownie. But until you pull something like this, you can learn to stop dreaming if you want to -- " "No, no, you're wrong -- oh, you're horribly wrong, Tohnny. Some of us can't adapt, we haven't got what it takes, or else we have something else in us that won't let us go along. And right there we're beat before we start. There's no place for us now, and there never will be." He looked up at the mate's impassive face. "We're in a life where we don't belong, impounded into a senseless, neverending series of fights and skirmishes and long, lonely waits, feeding this insane urge of the Government to expand, out to the planets, to the stars, farther and farther, bigger and bigger. We've got to go, seeking newer and greater worlds to conquer, with nothing to conquer them with, and nothing to conquer them for. There's life somewhere else in our solar system, so it must be sought out and conquered, no matter what or where it is. We live in a world of iron and fear, and there was no place for me, and others like me, until this ship came -- " Sabo looked at him strangely. "So I was right. I read it on your face when we were searching the ship. I knew what you were thinking..." His face darkened angrily. "You couldn't get away with it, Brownie. Where could you go, what could you expect to find? You're talking death, Brownie. Nothing else -- " "No, no. Listen, Johnny." Brownie leaned closer, his eyes bright and intent on the man's heavy face. "The captain has to take our word for it, until he sees derelict the ship. Even then he couldn't tell for sure -- I'm the only drive engineer on the Station. We have the charts, we could work with them, try to find out where the ship came from; I already have an idea of how the drive is operated. Another look and I could make it work. Think of it, Johnny! What difference does it make where we went, or what we found? You're a misfit, too, you know that -- this coarseness and bitterness is a shell, if you could only see it, a sham. You don't really believe in this world we're in -- who cares where, if only we could go, get away? Oh, it's a chance, the wildest, freak chance, but we could take it -- " "If only to get away from him ," said Sabo in a muted voice. "Lord, how I hate him. I've seen smallness and ambition before -- pettiness and treachery, plenty of it. But that man is our whole world knotted up in one little ball. I don't him, just to stop that voice from talking, just to see fear cross his face one time. But if we took the ship, it would break him for good." A new light appeared in the big man's eyes. "He'd be through, Brownie. Washed up." "And we'd be free -- " Sabo's eyes were sharp. "What about the acceleration? It killed those that came in the ship." "But they were so frail, so weak. Light brittle bones and soft jelly. Our bodies are stronger, we could stand it." Sabo sat for a long time, staring at Brownie. His mind was suddenly confused by the scope of the idea, racing in myriad twirling fantasies, parading before his eyes the long, bitter, frustrating years, the hopelessness of his own life, the dull aching feeling he felt deep in his stomach and bones each time he set back down on Earth, to join the teeming throngs of hungry people. He thought of the rows of drab apartments, the thin faces, the hollow, hunted eyes of the people he had seen. He knew that that was why he was a soldier -- because soldiers ate well, they had time to sleep, they were never allowed long hours to think, and wonder, and grow dull and empty. But he knew his life had been barren. The life of a mindless automaton, moving from place to place, never thinking, never daring to think or speak, hoping only to work without pain each day, and sleep without nightmares. And then, he thought of the nights in his childhood, when he had lain awake, sweating with fear, as the airships screamed across the dark sky above, bound he never knew where; and then, hearing in the far distance the booming explosion, he had played that horrible little game with himself, seeing how high he could count before he heard the weary, plodding footsteps of the people on the road, moving on to another place. He had known, even as a little boy, that the only safe place was in those bombers, that the place for survival was in the striking armies, and his life had followed the hard-learned pattern, twisting him into the cynical mold of the mercenary soldier, dulling the quick and clever mind, sponses of order and obey, stripping him of his heritage of love and humanity. Others less thoughtful had been happier; they had succeeded in forgetting the life they had known before, they had been able to learn easily and well the lessons of the repudiation of the rights of men which had crept like a blight through the world. But Sabo, too, was a misfit, wrenched into a mold he could not fit. He had sensed it vaguely, never really knowing when or how he had built the shell of toughness and cynicism, but also sensing vaguely that it was built, and that in it he could hide, somehow, and laugh at himself, and his leaders, and the whole world through which he plodded. He had laughed, but there had been long nights, in the narrow darkness of spaceship bunks, when his mind pounded at the shell, screaming out in nightmare, and he had wondered if he had really lost his mind. His gray eyes narrowed as he looked at Brownie, and he felt his heart pounding in his chest, pounding with a fury that he could no longer deny. "It would have to be fast," he said softly. "Like lightning, tonight, tomorrow -- very soon." "Oh, yes, I know that. But we can do it -- " "Yes," said Sabo, with a hard, bitter glint in his eyes. "Maybe we can." tense. For the first time in his life, Sabo knew the meaning of real fear, felt the clinging aura of sudden death in every glance, every word of the men around him. It seemed incredible that the captain didn't notice the brief exchanges with the little engineer, or his own sudden appearances and disappearances about the Station. But the captain sat in his cabin with angry eyes, snapping answers without even looking up. Still, Sabo knew that the seeds of suspicion lay planted in his mind, ready to burst forth with awful violence at any slight provocation. As he worked, the escape assumed greater and greater proportions in Sabo's mind; he knew with increasing urgency and daring that nothing must stop him. The ship was there, the only bridge away from a life he could no longer endure, and his determination blinded him to caution. Primarily, he pondered over the charts, while Brownie, growing hourly more nervous, poured his heart into a study of his notes and sketches. A second look at the engines was essential; the excuse he concocted for returning to the ship was recklessly slender, and Sabo spent a grueling five minutes dissuading the captain from accompanying him. But the captain's eyes were dull, and he walked his cabin, sunk in a gloomy, remorseful trance. The hours passed, and the men saw, in despair, that more precious, dangerous hours would be necessary before the flight could be attempted. And then, abruptly, Sabo got the call to the captain's cabin. He found the old man at his desk, regarding him with cold eyes, and his heart sank. The captain motioned him to a seat, and then sat derelict back, lighting a cigar with painful slowness. "I want you to tell me," he said in a lifeless voice, "exactly what Brownie thinks he's doing." Sabo went cold. Carefully he kept his eyes on the captain's face. "I guess he's nervous," he said. "He doesn't belong on a Satellite Station. He belongs at home. The place gets on his nerves." "I didn't like his report." "I know," said Sabo. The captain's eyes narrowed. "It was hard to believe. Ships don't just happen out of space. They don't wander out interstellar by accident, either." An unpleasant smile curled his lips. "I'm not telling you anything new. I wouldn't want to accuse Brownie of lying, of course -- or you either. But we'll know soon. A patrol craft will be here from the Triton supply base in an hour. I signalled as soon as I had your reports." The smile broadened maliciously. "The patrol craft will have experts aboard. Space drive experts. They'll review your report." "An hour -- " The captain smiled. "That's what I said. In that hour, you could tell me the truth. I'm not a drive man, I'm an administrator, and organizer and director. You're the technicians. The truth now could save you much unhappiness -- in the future." Sabo stood up heavily. "You've got your information," he said with a bitter laugh. "The patrol craft will confirm it." The captain's face went a shade greyer. "All right," he said. "Go ahead, laugh. I told you, anyway." Sabo didn't realize how his hands were trembling until he reached the end of the corridor. In despair he saw the plan crumbling beneath his feet, and with the despair came the cold undercurrent of fear. The patrol would discover them, disclose the hoax. There was no choice left -- ready or not, they'd have to leave. Quickly he turned in to the central control room where Brownie was working. He sat down, repeating the captain's news in a soft voice. "An hour! But how can we -- " "We've got to. We can't quit now, we're dead if we do." Brownie's eyes were wide with fear. "But can't we stall them, somehow? Maybe if we turned on the captain -- " "The crew would back him. They wouldn't dare go along with us. We've got to run, nothing else." He took a deep breath. "Can you control the drive?" Brownie stared at his hands. "I -- I think so. I can only try." "You've got to. It's now or never. Get down to the lock, and I'll get the charts. Get the sleds ready." He scooped the charts from his bunk, folded them carefully and bound them swiftly with cord. Then he ran silently down the corridor to the landing port lock. Brownie was already there, in the darkness, closing the last clamps on his pressure suit. Sabo handed him the charts, and began the laborious task of climbing into his own suit, panting in the darkness. And then the alarm was clanging in his ear, and the lock was stopped short, a cry on his lips, staring at the entrance to the control room. The captain was grinning, a nasty, evil grin, his eyes hard and humorless as he stood there flanked by three crewmen. His hand gripped an ugly power gun tightly. He just stood there, grinning, and his voice was like fire in Sabo's ears. "Too bad," he said softly. "You almost made it, too. Trouble is, two can't keep a secret. Shame, Johnny, a smart fellow like you. I might have expected as much from Brownie, but I thought you had more sense -- " Something snapped in Sabo's mind, then. With a roar, he lunged at the captain's feet, screaming his bitterness and rage and frustration, catching the old man's calves with his powerful shoulders. The captain toppled, and Sabo was fighting for the power gun, straining with all his might to twist the gun from the thin hand, and he heard his voice shouting, "Run! Go, Brownie , make it go!" The lock was open, and he saw Brownie's sled nose out into the blackness. The captain choked, his face purple. "Get him! Don't let him get away!" The lock clanged, and the screens showed the tiny fragile sled jet out from the side of the Station, the small huddled figure clinging to it, heading straight for the open port of the grey ship. "Stop him! The guns, you fools, the guns!" The alarm still clanged, and the control room was a flurry of activity. Three men snapped down behind the tracer-guns, firing without aiming, in a frenzied attempt to catch the fleeing sled. The sled began zig-zagging, twisting wildly as the shells popped on either side of it. The captain twisted away from Sabo's grip with a roar, and threw one of the crewmen to the deck, wrenching the gun controls from his hands. "Get the big ones on the ship! Blast it! If it gets away you'll all pay." Suddenly the sled popped into the ship's port, and the hatch slowly closed behind it. Raving, the captain turned the gun on the sleek, polished hull plates, pressed the firing levels on the war-head servos. Three of them shot out from the Satellite, like deadly bugs, careening through the intervening space, until one of them struck the side of the gray ship, and exploded in purple fury against the impervious hull. And the others nosed into the flame, and passed on through, striking nothing. Like the blinking of a light, the alien ship had throbbed, and jerked, and was gone. With a roar the captain brought his fist down on the hard plastic and metal of the control panel, kicked at the sheet of knobs and levers with a heavy foot, his face purple with rage. His whole body shook as he turned on Sabo, his eyes wild. "You let him get away! It was your fault, yours! But you won't get away! I've got you, and you'll pay, do you hear that?" He pulled himself up until his face was bare inches from Sabo's, his teeth bared in a frenzy of hatred. "Now we'll see who'll laugh, my friend. You'll laugh in the death chamber, if you can still laugh by then!" He turned to the men around him. "Take him," he snarled. "Lock him derelict in his quarters, and guard him well. And while you're doing it, take a good look at him. See how he laughs now." They marched him down to his cabin, stunned, still wondering what had happened. Something had gone in his mind in that second, something that told him that the choice had to be made, instantly. Because he knew, with dull wonder, that in that instant when the lights went on he could have stopped Brownie, could have saved himself. He could have taken for himself a piece of the glory and promotion due to the discoverers of an Interstellar drive. But he had also known, somehow, in that short instant, that the only hope in the world lay in that one nervous, frightened man, and the ship which could take him away. And the ship was gone. That meant the captain was through. He'd had his chance, the ship's coming had given him his chance, and he had muffed it. Now he, too, would pay. The Government would not be pleased that such a ship had leaked through his fingers. Captain Loomis was through. And him? Somehow, it didn't seem to matter any more. He had made a stab at it, he had tried. He just hadn't had the luck. But he knew there was more to that. Something in his mind was singing, some deep feeling of happiness and hope had crept into his mind, and he couldn't worry about himself any more. There was nothing more for him; they had him cold. But deep in his mind he felt a curious satisfaction, transcending any fear and bitterness. Deep in his heart, he knew that one man had escaped. And then he sat back and laughed. (Continued from, page #) And beside the farmhouse, on the ground, lay a pipe, its tobacco spilled, the last of its smoke swirling out of its bowl into the air, disappearing. The woman sat in the kitchen of the farmhouse and turned her head when the door opened. She widened her eyes and caught at her throat with her hand. The sun through the doorway shone down on metallic hands and a metallic face, gleaming on the surface which the straw hat and the overalls and the blue shirt didn't hide. The door snapped shut, and there was a sound of heavy metal footsteps against the kitchen floor. The woman pressed against her chair. "Who are you?" she screamed. "Henry," said the mechanical thing. Thorns, the vengeful, had determined his way. Aria, the healer, had determined her way. Which determined this classic meeting of the twain. By Richard E. Stockham Illustrated by Ed Emsh for years as they were arguing tonight. The man paced back and forth chain-smoking cigarettes; the woman sat motionless, watching him. They glanced at their watches with fearful eyes. They heard, with acutely alert ears, the goings and comings of people in the hall ; heard the shattering blast of rockets in the sky above the city. And they argued. "So you're going through with it tonight," he said heavily, "in your own way." "Yes." "Perhaps I should stop you." He crushed out his cigarette. "If the police were to hear -- " "No!" The word was thrown at him. "I know you don't mean that. But it's unworthy of you even to say it." She covered her face with nervous hands. "After all I am your wife." He stood over her, his lips tight. There was something of the fragile, finely made puppet about her, he thought, as though she had been refashioned a hundred times by some artisan seeking after perfect delicacy and precision. He softened momentarily. "Come with me then," he said. "No." "Why? Why?" "Your way is wrong" "We're the last two leaders of the opposition alive." His voice came swiftly and low. "The authority's beaten us. Their setup for killing, imprisonment, bribery and blackmail functions too well. Our whole organization's been scattered like matchsticks. The police are closing in on us. We're finished here on earth. We'll be lucky if we're killed quickly." He waited a moment for his words to take effect. "We go along together that far." She stood, clasping her hands. "Of course. Of course." "Look. I know you've finished that damned contraption of yours that'll take you into the atoms. I know you've been working on it for years. But I've been working too. My ship's been ready to take off into super-space for two days. But I haven't gone. I've been waiting for you. To wait at a time like this is to ask for death or worse. Now I demand you give up this insane idea of going into the atoms. You've got to come with me." "I've told you I can't escape with you out into the macrocosm. It's not my way ! # "The word 'escape' doesn't apply," he snapped, "to what I'm doing. You # re escaping. You'll creep into the microcosm and sit there like a seed that won't grow. You can't fight the Authority from the microcosm. That way is utter passivity and death. My way is fighting back. I'm going into hyperspace. My ship and I'll become so huge and powerful I'll throw suns around like snowballs. I'll toss meteors around like grains of corn. I'll upset gravities and warp time. I'll stretch and straighten space. I'll turn dimensions inside out -- " "Yes. You'll destroy. You'll ruin everything, you'll break the innocent as well as the guilty." "I'll have to take that chance," he said grimly. "But I'll destroy the Authority and everything that goes with it." She pulled from his grasp. "Violence and destruction are not my way. They never have been." Slowly now she sank into the chair, looked past him as she spoke. "You've always worshipped spaces and vacuums and voids. I've always been happy working with flowers and trees, the life of the meadow and valley, the rain and the new, small buds in springtime. We have always gone in opposite directions." She paused and smiled a bit wistfully. "It's funny. Now we find, too late to help our marriage, that there's a whole universe between us. You refuse, or perhaps you're afraid, I don't know, to go to the source of everything -- this table, this chair, this gown, your own. flesh. You don't want to understand life ; any more than you want to understand me. You must conquer it -- or destroy it. You must be a giant that can kick the earth around like a football. But I do want to understand, for in understanding lies the cure. My machine will take me into the atoms. I'll become part of the fabric and tapestry of the very warp and woof of our world. By becoming a part of it, I will know. I'll find the secret of life in inner space and I'll return and release our people from the Authority. And you? You'll never really understand anything. You'll be a wild comet, yes, but I'll be a raindrop in a deep well, learning patience. I'll be a true healer." For a moment sadness rose and softened his face. "There's nothing more to say, is there." "I'm afraid not." "We'll make the goodbys quick." He came to her. "At least we're being honest with each other. No lies. No pettiness. We've developed pretty powerful ideals. And they just won't fit together. It's that simple -- and that good." She looked up at him and smiled. "At least I haven't lost you to another woman." He returned her smile. "We're getting sentimental. This isn't good. It's weakening." He bent and lightly kissed her hair. For an instant her breathing stopped. "Goodby." "Goodby," she whispered. He strode to the door and opened it. His body snapped taut. drawn blaster, stood a man in the shining red garb of the police command. He resembled Mephisto with his flowing cape and snug trousers. His face was dark, his nose thin, his eyes black and very bright. "You seem surprised," said the man in red. Aria had half risen from the chair... As the eyes of the policeman turned on her, she sank back. "How opportune," the policeman continued. "The eve of your departures." The smile set on his mouth. His gun snapped up on a line with Thorus' heart. "No sudden moves, or you'll be burnt to a cinder. But no. That's what you want -- a quick death. So let me threaten you with merely burning your legs off." The blaster lowered. "It may interest you to know we have a recording of your whole conversation. But there's something else." His eyes holding Thorus, he gave a sharp command to two burly, bullnecked policemen. They stepped from the shadows and stood behind the commander. One held a small, black box. "I see," the commander said, "You've had experience before with the truth clamps. You're frightened." Thorus motioned the commander inside. "A little fear trickles through my hate." The door swung shut behind the three policemen. Thorus glanced at Aria. Her fingers clutched the arms of the chair. He knew she was thinking of the blocks that had recently been installed in their minds by X-ray hypnosis. Would the blocks hold after three days? Three days, they both knew was the limit. "It's your methods of escape we must have," said the commander. He motioned to one of the policemen. Thorus watched the man step in front of him and raise the clamps to his forehead. He saw features that were thick and heavy, as though they had been roughly moulded out of too wet clay. "You can see," the commander went on, "the tremendous advantage to us of being able to go into the macrocosm and toss meteors around like bits of com, as you say." He glanced at Aria, who sat huddled in the chair, like a porcelain doll. "And then into the microcosm. Unlimited power. A whole new universe to conquer and colonize. Aria did not move or speak. "I see she refuses to face reality." He turned to Thorns. "But you will face reality -- and so will she when we've finished. Had you conducted your experiments in behalf of the Authority, you would have been well rewarded. But no, you have been working against us -- however, it has been for the Authority after all." Thorus felt the clamps tight on his temples, like two steel fingers. Sitting stiffly on a chair, he felt sweat on his back and chest, felt it seep from his forehead down into his eyes, felt the bum of salt. There was tightness all through him as he waited for the first shock. His fingernails cut his palms. His breath stopped. His shoulders and arms hardened, stretched tight his tunic. The commander flicked his finger at the one kneeling before the little black box. This one tripped a lever. A soft hum seemed to rise from the box and fill the room. Thorus listened to the hum grow until it was a soft, high pitched scream. He closed his eyes. The next instant a shattering blow ripped through every inch of his body. Fire ran along his nerves. He felt his lips grimacing away from his teeth, felt the comers of his mouth stretching back to his ears. Oh God, oh God, he cried out in silent agony. Hold back my screams. Then he heard himself groan. He cut off the sound of it. Choked. Heard a growl deep in his chest. Lights flashed in his eyes and there was a tearing apart through his whole body. A squeezing together rushed all around him and an insane pounding and pulling as though his flesh were being beaten and clawed from his bones. Time dropped away from him until it seemed he had never been aware of anything but this agony. Then he was empty of sensation. He felt himself fall forward, felt heavy hands catch him roughly and set him upright. The soft voice of the commander flowed into his mind like a voice from outer space: "You will tell us your method of going into the macrocosm. The equations, the type ship, its propellent, where the ship is hidden. Thorus felt enveloped in a void. The voice of the commander droned on. "All we need is a clue. We'll work out the rest." Life and feeling and thought were surging back into Thoms now. Strength filled his muscles again. Sight came into his eyes. Again he sat straight and stiff on the chair. The block held, he thought. It held and they cannot know now!" "Speak!" The commander's voice rose. "Damn you!" He seized Thorus by the hair. "You've blocked off the information. I'll see both of you tortured until you'll wish to kill each other. Then we'll try the clamps again. He smashed his fist into Thoms' face. On the instant the commander pulled back his fist, Thoms reached out and jerked the blaster from his belt. His foot came up hard against the man's groin. There was a grunting cry of pain. Thorus fell backward off the stool, pressing the blaster trigger as he hit the floor. He saw blood gush from the commander's middle, saw him pitch sideways, like a broken statue, heard Aria's scream. The clamps pulled from his head. He swung the gun's muzzle to the two policemen, clawing at their holsters. The blaster struck out, a long coughing hiss, a spray of flame. There were cries and gasps and jerking and clutching and the scrambling fall of the two bodies. Then silence. Thorus crawled unsteadily to his feet, stood swaying. The gun hung loosely in his hand. Now he felt Aria close to him, heard her voice trembling and breathy. "Thorus! Are you all right?" "Yes." "The blocks held! They held!" Steadying himself, he saw Aria glance at the bodies on the floor. "Destruction!" she shuddered. "Nothing but destruction. Oh God, I'm sick of it!" Thorus let the gun drop to the floor. "There's no time to talk. Your laboratory." He grasped her by the shoulders and turned her toward a bright steel door across the room. " You'll save time to go into your damned microcosm. You'll make it. Good luck. If I have any luck at all, I'll make it too." He gave her a push. Without speaking or turning back, she moved across the room, as though sleep walking... The gleaming door slab slid back as she approached it, closed behind her. The memory of her face stayed in his mind for a long moment after she had disappeared, and from the room's atmosphere he seemed to breathe in regret and a sense of their failure. He turned abruptly, looked down at each crumpled body. Opening the door a crack, he searched the brightly lighted street for the figure of a policeman, saw none, stepped outside and ran. deftly, swiftly at the transparent body-length cylinder. She checked wire connections, dials, buttons, then opened one end of the tube, lowered herself into place, when she had closed the tube, she lay still, the forefinger of her right hand resting on a button. During all these preparations, she was viewing, with her inner sight, Thorus' tiny ship streaking through the night toward a distant mountain peak where a small metal ball, large enough for one man, sat shrouded by a screen of invisibility. Now she saw the streak of flame die in the night and the tiny ship sitting motionless beside the metal ball; saw Thorus open a hatch in the ball's side, let himself through the opening and swing shut the circle of steel. "Thank God," she said. "Whatever comes now, at least he's made it." Wiping away the vision of him, she hesitated a moment, said goodby to earth and life as she'd known it and would never know it again. A moment of yearning for a chance to live safely and well as a wife and mother swept her with sadness. The yearning held her finger from the button; a final hugging of human love and full human life, a last lonely cry for earth as she had known it in childhood with the press of wind and the touch and sight of green growing things and the depth of blue above and the ground beneath. Feeling then as though she were plunging into midnight ocean depths, she thrust her finger hard against the button! Instantly light shimmered all about! The room dissolved. A sense of dreaming too vividly, yet of being deep in a sleep that was a thousand times more acutely awake than any awakeness she had ever known filled all her being. She felt herself sinking into a great bottomless depth and yet at the same time soaring through space to the ends of the universe, until both falling and soaring flowed into each other and became suspension. And then suddenly she saw all things as one. She saw the intricate design of a snowflake that was the snows of all the earth and a drop of water that held all the oceans. There was the rhythmic beating all around as though of a great, omnipresent heart and the surge and flow of oceans of lifeblood and the rise and fall of eternal breathing. A speck of soil was the soil of all the earth, from which grew forests and fields of green. She let herself out into the space of all this and was merely there, like time is, where there is the motion and change of birth and death and birth again and death again. She felt a gentle touch on her body that was the body of all mankind and knew it for the touch of air, a single element of all earth's winds that yet was all the clear winds of earth. The next moment a thundrous roar crashed like a tidal wave. She felt a gigantic shaking in all the snow and water, in the oceans and mountains, in the air and wind, in the blood and life and beating heart. A faltering of the rhythm and flow went, like a cosmic shudder, through all this life and through her own being so that she was conscious of nausea and ache and a violent flinging about. She had a sense then of pulling within herself, like a sea anemone that has been touched by an enemy. And in her silent voice, she cried out, "Thorns!" In the macrocosm. Thorus destroying! Destroying! The next instant her inner sight swung back to where Thoms' ship, the shining metal ball, had leapt up off the mountain of earth; leapt, in the fraction of a second, through the blue earth covering into black, outer space. Her inner sight saw the metal ball inflating, a cosmic baloon, flashing like the sun, then seeming to fill the space between all the suns! conscious of being a colossus that could step from planet to planet as though he were using them for stones to cross a pond of earth water. Step past the solar system, he thought, out into the universe. Now the sun became a tiny ball of fire, a lightning bug, the earth a grain of dust. He could blow out the light of the sun, flick Earth and the other planets into nothingness. "I've broken through," he thought. "I've done it! I've been released." And looking out and away, he saw universe upon universe extending past infinity, it seemed, an ocean without a horizon. Now, said his thought, I will destroy all evil and I shall begin with the evil of earth. As though he were looking through a microscope, he focused his sight on the grain of dust that was earth. His fingers made delicate adjustments on a dial, and earth, softly green and blue, swam clearly into his vision. He magnified his sight of earth until he could see all of it like a gigantic relief map. He saw the fortified places of the Authority -- great, spreading, shining, metal domes; saw them dotting the earth; saw the lines of vehicles speeding back and forth between them. He saw too the hamlets of the people, in the spaces between the forts of the Authority, all places of squalor with row upon row of boxlike houses, each exactly like the other. There were not any green lawns or shade trees, only houses and streets and people moving about. Thorus felt his anger rise. He pressed a button that flung out fields of gravity. Earth rocked and heaved, like an animal in convulsions. Volcanos exploded, shot out their flaming, poisonous refuse. Oceans were monsters writhing and rolling in their troughs, reaching onto the land, as though to pull it beneath them. And the land itself split wide and snapped shut great, yawning jaws. There was a wild rushing about among all the people, a madness, as though frantic motion would save them. They looked up off the convulsed earth with panic stricken eyes, their voices raised in agony. Thorus' voice sounded, "The time for the death of the Authority has come. I will crush them as though I were crushing snails. He reached out from the ship with rays that seized meteors and flung them like a schoolboy flinging stones at bottles, one by one against the massive, shining domes of the Authority. The domes cracked and split and were crushed. The atomic bombs broke open with flame that leapt up yellow tongues and grew mushrooms in the sky, and a burning death spread all around. Then Thorus was quiet, watching all that he had destroyed. But suddenly, he became aware of Aria's thought within him, crying out. "Destroyer! Murderer! In moments you've set humanity back a hundred thousand years. You're worse than the Authority. There'll never be any peace for you or for the earth or even the universe after what you've done. Other Authorities will come and you'll have to destroy them and others and others. Destruction for you forever, on and on, until you fill the universe with it..." In his mind, Thorus saw her among the falling snowflakes and the drops of cool water and the green, growing atoms; saw her in the transparent tube sink deeper and deeper into the microcosm, away and away like a minnow swimming down into a beautiful lake on a summer's day. Deeper, ever deeper, until there was nothing but the blue, sleepy water. As Thorus looked upon the earth again and saw the terrible destruction he had wrought, he trembled. There was the realization in him that, beneath his consciousness, had lain the hope that, after he had wiped clean the earth, Aria's healing power would remake it. But now there would be no healing, and for thousands of years earth would lie a smoking ruins with the people crawling about its shattered surface like bugs. He turned from all he saw. He closed his eyes and threw his ship out into space, threw it away into the fathomless void. He must escape from the universe, must flee from the horror that filled him at the desolation he had wrought. Straight out into space, out into the forever, where earth would cease to exist, where he and his remorse would be lost. streaked past yet he seemed within himself to be hanging motionless in an infinite sea of blackness while he knew that the speed of him cracked through the barrier of time and space; knew that it was a speed beyond any conceived by the mind of man. On into forgetfulness, escape beyond his memory, faster and farther away than his mind, so far away that even earth would disappear in his thought. As incredible distances stretched almost to breaking between himself and earth, he thought : So this is the end. For all I've been and wanted to be, this is it. A nothingness beyond the universe. But as the last word went from his thought, he saw a greenish blue ball of light rush toward him. He watched it inflate in the port. It enveloped the whole ship. The suns and the galaxies had faded into nothingness. He was aware of sinking into eternal depths but at the same time he felt himself soaring until sinking and soaring flowed into each other. After a time, he saw shimmering white crystals encircling his ship. And then the encircling crystals became one snowflake reflecting light like the moon. A great wonder filled him and he stared in overwhelming awe. He heard his own heartbeat in his body and outside the ship, holding the ship in an eternal throbbing; heard the flowing of his own blood like a turbulent river; heard his breathing become the ebb and flow of wind, like the sound of surf. His body too became the soil of earth and its rock and water and he was deeply conscious of growth all through him. He was birth and death and he was both in one and he was the life of mankind, of animals, of plants. As he waited in what seemed to be eternity, sunlight broke into his sight and he saw a field of grass forming around his ship. Blue sky swam into focus above him. White cloud patches formed in the blue as though they had been ordered there by the word of creation. Thorns knew then that he was on earth again, that he had come up from deep inside it. Rising up, like one awakening uncertainly from sleep in a strange room, he opened the ship's hatch and looked out upon the land. A flash of light caught his eyes then, from above, and he looked up in wonder. He gasped. der, sinking down through the blue, like a leaf, settling gently to the earth a hundred feet away. She crawled out and stood looking across the field of grass at him, a strange, smile on her face. Thoms leaped from his ship and ran toward her. He ran silently. She held out her hands and he grasped them tenderly, as he would grasp the hands of a child. And all he could say was, "Aria. Aria." "Thoms," she said, and there was courage and joy in her voice. "We've come back." They stared into each other's eyes for a long moment and then they were close, and they held to each other and swayed. "Do you know what's happened?" she said. "Yes. You came back through hyper-space while I came back through the atoms." His voice was quiet. "Oh, Lord. Oh good and strange Lord. We forgot that one of the great men twenty thousand years ago, proved that space was curved." "Yes." She stood away from him now, yet held to his hand. "We couldn't escape from our place in life or ourselves or the good and the evil that we have done. We came back to our earth and now we must do what we have left undone." There was much to be done. Thoms looked around. He saw in the distance a cmshed and smoking mins. "I've destroyed the Authority, but I've destroyed too much. Now the people are in chaos." Aria stood silently awhile, and then moved his arm. "But now you can help me to heal them. You've seen in the microcosm, as I have in the macrocosm that all life is one. Now we can show the people that outer and inner space are not separate. We can show them how they exist together and how there can be no escape in either or from either. It will take a long time. But we will do it. And the doing will be grand." She paused. "The beginning and the end, Thorns. The greatness and the smallness. The light and the darkness. It's all here." "And all that's in between. That too." "Yes," she answered quietly. "That too." They turned to the smoking ruins and arm in arm began walking toward it. Twenty years is a long time to live in anticipation. At least , Professor Pettibone thought so -- until the twenty years were up. Say "Hello" for Ale of course Professor Pettibone had no way of knowing it. He arose, as he had been doing for the previous twenty years, donned the tattered remnants of his space suit, and went out into the open. He stood erect, bronzed, magnificent, faced distant Earth, and recited : "Good morning bright sunshine, We're glad you are here. You make the world happy, And bring us good cheer." It was something he had heard as a child and, isolated here on Mars, he had remembered it and used it to keep from losing his power of speech. The ritual finished, he walked to the edge of the nearest canal, and gathered a bushel or so of dried Martian moss. He returned and began polishing the shiny exterior of the wrecked space ship. It had to really glitter if it was to be an effective beacon in guiding the rescue ship. Professor Pettibone knew -- had known for years -- that a ship would come. It was just a matter of time, and as the years slipped by, his faith diminished not a whit. With his task half completed, he glanced up at the sun and quickened the polishing. It was a long walk to the place the berry bushes grew, and if he arrived too late, the sun would have dried out the night's crop of fragile berrys and he would wait until the morrow for nourishment. But on this day, he was fated to arrive at the bush area not at all, because an alien sound from above again drew the Professor's eyes from his work, and he knew that the day had arrived. The ship was three times as large as any he had ever visualized, and its futuristic design told him, sharply, how far he fallen behind in his dreaming. He smiled and said, quite calmly. "I daresay I am about to be rescued." And he experienced a thrill as the great ship set down and two men emerged therefrom. A thrill tinged with a guilt-sense, because emotional experiences were rare in an isolated life and seemed somehow indecent. The two men held weapons. They advanced upon Professor Pettibone, looked up into his face, reflected a certain wary hostility. That the hostility was tinged with instinctive respect, even awe, made it no less potent. One of them asked. "Fella -- man came in ship -- sky boat -- long time ago. Him dead? Where?" Appropriate gestures accompanied the words. Professor Pettibone smiled down at the little men and bowed. "You are of course referring to me. I came in the ship. I am Professor Pettibone. It was nice of you to hunt me up." The eyes of the two Terran spacemen met and locked in startled inquiry. One of them voiced the reaction of both when he said, "What the hell -- " "You no doubt are curious as to the fate of the other members of the expedition. They were killed, all save Fletcher, who lasted a week." Professor Pettibone waved a hand. "There -- in the graveyard." But their eyes remained on the only survivor of that ill-fated first expedition. It was hard to accept him as the man they sought, but, faced with undeniable similarity between what they expected and what they had found, the two spacemen had no alternative. "I hope your food supply is ample -- and varied," Professor Pettibone said. This seemed to bring them out of their bemusement. "Of course, Professor. Would you care to come aboard?" The other made a try at congenial levity. "You must be pretty hungry after twenty years." "Really -- has it been that long? I tried to keep track at first..." "We can blast off anytime you say. You're probably pretty anxious to get back." "Indeed I am. The changes, in twenty years -- must be breathtaking. I wonder if they'll remember me?" A short time later, the Professor said, "It's amazing. A ship of this size handled by only two men." Then he sat down to a repast laid out by one of the awed spacemen. But, after nibbling a bit of this, a forkful of that, he found that satisfaction lay in the anticipation moreso than in the eating. "We'll look around and see what we can find in the way of clothing for you, Professor," one of the spacemen said. Then the man's bemusement returned. His eyes traveled over the magnificent physique before him. The perfect giant of a man; the great, Apollo-like head with the calm, clear eyes; the expression of complete contentment and serenity. The space man said, "Professor -- to what do you attribute the changes in your body. What is there about this planet -- ?" "I really don't know." Professor Pettibone looked down his torso with an impersonal eye. "I think the greenish skin pigmentation is a result of mineral-heavy vapors that occur during certain seasons. The growth. As to my body -- I real( Continued on page # ) :#m This story concerns a contest, a contestant and a beautiful wife; also, perhaps, that ancient Biblical quotation that says " take therefore no thought for the morrow ; for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself". The Contest By Gavin Hyde Illustrated by Orban center of the city in the yellow early afternoon, increasingly annoyed by the intrusion of unimportant domestic memories that his mind relived, not without embarrassment, and a sense of his own failing. Today, when he had turned to her at the door, he could have said, "Goodbye, I'll see you in an hour or so." There were many things he could have said which would have freed him from his conscience during his walk down. But he couldn't. He tightened up and could say nothing of how he felt. For his mind was tense with the anticipated combat to soon take place in a cubicle behind the great hanging thought-transmission screen. The cubicle and thoughttransmission screen had been in use continuously until yesterday, but now they were idle, along with the two TT machines, waiting for the last round in the contest. She should understand -- on today, of all days! He never spoke to anyone before a match. Speech disturbed the strength and color of one's thoughts because it was more difficult than thinking. It also involved the acceptance of another personality. In the contest, acceptance was a very bad thing. So was this memory analysis, Cyl thought. Asking himself why he hadn't spoken to his wife! This slipping back in the train of thought would never do in the contest. That was the theory of Jons, the foremost analyst of developments, anyway. What was it he said in the Thought-Transmission Annual? "The contest consists of the conflict between two imaginations. Each must analyze the interest and logic of the other, trying to possess the resultant theme through complex development of thought. The drive, the momentum of the imagination is the telling factor in the contest." Cyl had studied that statement! It had been released by Jons after his tragic retirement. Like other philosophers who had dreamed of perpetual control and championship, he had been eliminated soon after the birth of the contest -- when the powerful and mercenary sponsors moved in, bringing with them their strange assortment of thinkers. One year the contest was won by a barber who could maintain the most powerful (and infinitely boring) thought train based on current events, suicides, wrecks, filibusters, sports, and scandals. Rumor said that his simple training consisted of a glance at the morning paper. Then there was the fisherman who could turn from the most delicate winding of a gold silken thread on a trout fly to the baleful glare of a giant squid, almost, it seemed, "faster than the transmission of thought." People had only heard about the new and exciting thought-transmission device when a last holdout of the decadent "Quiz" show M.C.'s decided it would be a good gag to get a married man from the audience, put him on-stage with a beautiful girl, and telecast the interchange of ideas. It was imperative his wife be in the audience. Oh, yes! That was half the fun, watching her reaction to her husband's futile attempt to avoid what might be called a public mental infidelity. Well, the booming growth of the contest was past, but even now Cyl never knew what to expect during the first rounds of elimination. Three months before this final day, Cyl had been faced with hopeful after hopeful, never knowing what sort of attack was coming with the sound of the buzzer. A roller-skater had thrown a scare into him with that infernal organ giving off its regular, unconquerable squeals, plus the sound of all the skates the pudgy boy could muster into his mind, rolling and rolling! Every time Cyl began to get the upper hand by, say, increasing the speed until it was impossible to imagine that one was on skates and then switching to skis, or something like that, the boy would proCyl would be, back in the rink. However, by a stroke of luck Cyl had broken his leg once in his amateurish attempts to go backward, and he was able to bring back the terrible ring of hot, oversympathetic faces that immediately surrounded him. He just continued the idea of the injury, the ride in the copter-ambulance, the hospital, ether, blood. Rather a rude way to treat a child, but what was one to do? To Cyl this was a business. Children had to take their chances with the rest. Cyl remembered the semi-finals, and one of those people who continually turned up at the contest, experts in a certain field, like glassblowers, taxidermists, diamond cutters, even orchid fanciers. He almost paid dearly for his love of the strange, the beautiful. When the buzzer sounded he had found himself submerged in a light-green place, in a struggle with what seemed a tremendous piece of carved jade. It had four paddles sticking out which waved, pushed and scratched. In all his life his opponent had had but one job, that of removing tortoises from the canneries' holding-tanks by turning them on their backs. Cyl had diminished the size of the shell, transforming it laboriously into a girl's bathing suit. Then he had started at top and bottom developing her body, and had managed just in time to gain dominance. The judges' decision had been long in coming even though they were experts at perceiving the telltale "unexpected metamorphosis of a thought", as Jons called it. was only Cyl's brain against one more. He looked at their pictures on the program. It was funny, those two heads, awkward-looking things, being capable of waging a battle against each other. Cyl knew what was in the head on the right. That was his. The other one was his opponent. He would have to be powerful to have come so far. Cyl, for his part, had worried about every opponent. He must have the sure sweep of dreams to hurl at his last adversary. He had to win for his wife. He kept telling himself it wasn't prestige he was after. He had to do it for Lin, because he felt he must somehow pay for the gulf that had widened between them because of his preoccupation with the contest. He had practically stopped talking altogether! He loved her. He knew it as he watched her moving around the house. But he could not afford the distraction involved in giving her his love. There he was, night after night, his mind rising to a point of secure joy in having her and then receding into the problems of the contest. Cyl knew that everything had to be sacrificed. A few weeks before, in a state of exasperation at the thought of facing a chess champion, he had taken his chess pieces out to try to figure some way to foil his opponent. Chessplayers and scientists in specialized fields had a quality called conformance. It helped them, but it was also a weakness. Every time these people won by the use of the same image. From one round to the next, they projected the one idea that obsessed them. What they hoped for was that they would draw either a sequence of men who could comprehend their theories, or that those who didn't would be too stupid to distract them. Cyl had to break down the chessplayer's conformance, somehow, think of something that would wreck the precision of a chess game. The answer had come to him. He decided he would simply create a physical experience here and now which he could bring to mind during his mental struggle with the master. So he scooped up the chess pieces and walked to the kitchen, savoring the experience as much as possible. He dropped the little dolls into the disposal unit, one by one, as if he were supposed to be absolutely sure of their death. It was evident from the gritty, staccato whine that the appliance was not made for grinding plastatron. It soon stopped dead. That had been unfortunate, but to Cyl's joy, he found it enabled him to retrieve the chips and dust that used to be chessmen. This treasure he carried back to the board. He played a couple of mock-serious games with the rubble. He pushed a little bit of dust here, captured a chip there, and finally checkmated a beheaded King. The crazy thing about it was that when he had finished and jumbled the remains off onto the floor, he had felt sure his idea would be a success. It was understandable that Lin would take a dim view of the insane operation, but Gyl had really been surprised at her that time. She became very emotional, cried, said he didn't understand her. What a peculiar thing to say! Anyway, he couldn't worry about something like that now. If he won there would be lots of time to make up for the strain. C YL bent close to the picture on the program again. What he knew about his opponent wasn't going to be of much use because this man was one of those frightening dark horses. Hardly anyone went to see him. Why? Everybody liked Cyl's projections. They were varied, subtle. He liked them that way. Sometimes they were full of the conversation of things that had never talked before, almost going out of control as though he were just a loudspeaker, through which one could hear, at last, the sound of a clam working its way into the sand, or a goose's bill rattling at the corn in some far and frosty field. And the other man? His name was Grus. Those who had been curious enough to watch him at work had come back with an old story. Surely it could not be true that he had come so far on some sort of sexual pitch! But they all assured Cyl there was nothing out of the ordinary about the man. Each time he started the round with a very dull series of transmissions, identified by most people as being connected with the mechanics of common machines. That was plausible. The paper had said Grus was a home-appliance repairman. Anyway, they went on, Grus would continue these occupational ramblings until his opponent overpowered them. Then he would switch to the image of a woman, the switch being effected with apparent ease. From that moment on Grus' competitors had little power over the development of the thought. The most peculiar quality in the women Grus imagined was the plain, unexciting appearance -- no beautiful bodies or come-hither looks. These were just old or young, bored or sad, forgotten or unloved women. Many of his opponents had been questioned after the round. Who was the woman? What was the power of Grus' thought? Not one of the men had an answer. Naturally the beaten ones didn't feel much like talking to reporters and curious contestants, but from what they did say it was definite the woman on the screen was no acquaintance, living, dead, or dreamed. A voice from the instrument over  the door said, "Mr. Mar, you have five minutes." Then he heard his wife's steps click-clicking down the smooth, white hall. She came into the room and sat down, with her purse, as though the setting-down of the purse was just as important as the seating of the body. She knew she mustn't speak... Gyl would either have to invent TT machines that could be carried by husband and wife or quit the contest. He wasn't worried about himself. He could live among the suspended splinters of his mind. Reactions were conversation. But then there was love, which could never be kept within the safe confines of the mind. Love was too frantic. It broke through the skull and left its hard cloven hoofprints everywhere, never forgetting, though, to return to rest, to sleep, and to play its surprising part in the drama of dreams as a young African girl swimming, or a red-skirted maid who has lingered a moment too long in the garden, who stops just once on the walk under the ivory wall, to look into your eyes. Cyl walked past Lin. He almost said something to her as he paused before stepping out into the hall, but he knew she would have released a flood of words. He couldn't afford to think about what she said now. Her white-gloved hand was lightly closed on the orange frontrow ticket. There was no cheering when Cyl walked across the stage and sat down. The Contest Board had asked that noise be kept to a minimum. But there was always a heavy murmur, feet scuffling and coughing. It was soothing to Cyl. He had been a favorite in his long fight and he knew they wanted to see him crowned. Especially since most of them had seen Grus at the projection and had developed a firm dislike for him. Grus seemed to be calm, had his helmet adjusted, and was chatting with one of the technicians. audience quieted. Cyl thought of the hum of bees working in a group of white, weatherbeaten hives. He hoped this would emerge well on the screen after the buzzer and also attack at close quarters by the white enamel kitchen that he expected from Grus. There was the buzzer. It was chaotic, like the beginning of every round between strong imaginations. Cyl worked to establish two levels of thought. One dictated his course of action. The other was the actual, projected thought which would affect the screen picture. This was usual, because if one's strategy got mixed up with one's projection he would become easy prey to the simplest idea from his opponent. He had guessed almost right. Grus started with the inner parts of the hamper of a common laundry system. It was sorting the clothes into different groups, delicate rayons one way, denim workclothes another. Cyl's hives were petrifying the cloth and his bees were becoming more and more numerous, so that when he had thought them all out of the hives there was a cloud of humming. walking, flying, seething bees that was shutting out the whiteness of the laundry. Grus backed his clothes down through the machine until they reached the washing element and began turning CyPs bees into dirty suds, flowing and pushing. It was time for Cyl to make his play for dominance. The sea. He was looking back over the stern of a ship. The water was boiling away from him with the ferocity that only the sea has. The clothes became translucent eels, falling over each other in their effort to feed on the remaining bees. They leaped out and slimed against each other. They dove in the white froth. Grus was trying to bring back the precision of his machine. He tried to ram Cyl head-on with the image of black pistons and sharp cogs soaking and dripping in oil. The machine parts became obvious only at intervals, in the dark lines that surrounded the white foam, but the viscosity was ruining CyPs spray, and his eels were flowing together into a conveyor belt. So out of the sleek pistons Cyl made darting sharks with black, black fins that slashed among the eels, dividing them and throwing their mauled, bloody bodies aside into the greener brine. Cyl relaxed, but realized moments later that Grus was not the pushover he had seemed so far. For CyPs sharks, which had promised to be unapproachable in speed and ferocity, had, with perfect subtlety, been turned into a group of men in tails enjoying a Christmas party. The dazzling foam was a swirling snowfall, the blood a spray of holly berries here and there among green spears of pine and fir. Grus was doing his best work in black and white. His stiff, black men were like dolls, perambulating around a Christmas tree. Grus was not sympathetic with the green and red that had been left over from CyPs image, for those colors were suffering a snow change, becoming colder, whiter, crisper as the winter fell in upon them. The walls disappeared into the gloomy whiteness, the tree was heavier with snow, but the men who before seemed festive took on a funereal quality. The slow flakes passed them, for they were just visiting. The background remained a dark void. The tree never reached the formless stage, but shook itself and weaved from side to side. It was a huge white bear. The men stopped their slow traveling at this and as though at a signal filed into the dark cave. The animal turned, hunched and shook himself once more, and followed them. As a man wakes who has been forbidden to sleep, Cyl escaped the other man's mind with a feeling of total fear, mental and physical. He looked apprehensively at the clock. Grus had managed only to catch up what he had lost in the beginning of the round. But why did he stop? He must have tired his mind, until his thoughts just fell from the peak of imaginative power into that shaded opening, fatigue. Cyl was reassured of this as he let his mind slip back to the projection. Grus had returned to a sleek, silent home-freezer. Cyl threw himself into the effort to reach Grus with some thought that would be familiar to him. He had to do that before he could metamorphose the idea for his own purposes. By imagining the storage contents of the box, Cyl brought into the projection a lot of waxed cartons of ice cream. As he reveled in their cold, sweet smell he saw himself as the head on a coin, buried in a large, square, white birthday cake. He heard the muffled voices of the children singing "Happy Birthday to You," the girls fairly well oriented to the words and rhythm of the song, the boys lagging behind or forging ahead, as well as the voice of one misguided child who was familiar only with the words, "Home, Home on the Range," for he used these lyrics for each line. and he could hear the candles snapping and fluttering above him. Suddenly there was noise. The table shuddered, forks and knives clanged together, fists pounded on the crepe tablecloth and pieces of gum were pressed against the underside of the table with a faint squashing sound. The knife hissed through the airy cake, but contrary to tradition, it caught Cyl on his serrated edge and rolled him out on the plate, bared. All that remained was the knife which lay beside him and his wife's face. She looked down at him from above with gray indifference. Cast out of dominance by his wife's image? It was she! Yet it wasn't. She didn't look like that, walking down the street. That wasn't the way she looked when she sat and watched him perform. He glanced quickly at her seat. It was empty. The projection now showed her lying on their bed. For an instant Cyl felt embarrassed at the idea of her being held up in front of the public, but then he realized that to them it was just any old midmorning housewife. Cyl looked down again, searching the auditorium seats. Then he saw her. She wasn't out yet. But she was walking quickly away, a small back in the shadows of the great hall. All the faces were turned to him except one. She moved toward the little door so far up the aisle. There was a flash of white light. She was gone. Gone? The word echoed in his mind like the bell on the door of a grocery store. It rang. Someone had left, left him among the sweet smells of coffeecake and wheat crackers. So much alone, here. He wanted to run to the jingie door and yell, "Come back! What about all these wonderful things? These wonderful things we are going to have? Lin! These..." But the bell had tinkled. It had already said, "gone." Cyl's mind wandered, crazed, over the events of the last few moments. Grus. Grus. What had he done? Something like the chessmen. That's what Cyl and Lin were like now, wasn't it? Grus had picked them up before, sliced them up. Then he had strewn the pieces. Grus, come a-riding to Cyl's door on one of his cement mixers. See this! You have a silver candlestick, mister? He'll make dimes of it, and for half price! Grus dominating the screen, for Cyl could no longer focus on the contest of thoughts... his thoughts were now only of Lin. No reason to go on trying, nothing down here in the ashes, in the obsidian loneliness where the flowers, once so red and yellow, are black and painful -- for the lack of the lovely eyes to look upon them. Lin's eyes. And when he saw her eyes again for that fleeting moment, he saw a light. It was a light of memory only, now that everything was over, but he had to cling to it. Anything to save him from the utter darkness. He saw a plain with stars overhead, and down below the myriad lights of a festival. For Cyl, a beginning. A beautiful memory, Lin, the first time he had looked at her. She was a young girl standing near the crowd that had gathered to watch one of those rocket launchings. They were all jabbering. The danger. The chances one took! Oh, the bravery. Except for the children, of course, who were stealing things to take back to their bedrooms. The police were working their way around the circle trying to keep people from breaking into the flash zone. She was standing near the knot of pilots, who were attaching to their bodies the equipment they could put on outside of the rocket. It was obvious she wanted to go nearer but was too self-conscious to do so, or perhaps afraid she might touch one of them strangely, on the shoulder, and thus enchant him forever. Yes, she was afraid that some part of her might go with these heroes and yet she was loath to believe she could give them nothing. Then one of them said, "Take a good look, wonderboys. That may be the last chick you'll see, let alone get close to." At this she turned away with a look of infinite pity and resignation that left her eyes burning in the night, there on the plain, and walked back into the city. Once more. Cyl saw her eyes, luminous. Springtime. Springtime, and the contest had ended for the year. He was in one of his favorite haunts, the Museum of Natural History, in the room of the luminous minerals. It was wonderful to stand there, in the dark, with thousands of eternal eyes looking at you, all impassive. There was no accusation there; only a silent, heavenly atmosphere of immortality  Someone was standing on the other side of the room. Silhouetted against pale green stones etched with fantastic pink lines, was the girl he had seen the year before. He couldn't see her features, but he knew from the shock to his senses that it must be she. Soon Cyl stood very near her. He wanted to go on, really, go on around and out into the sunlight of the courtyard. It would be much simpler than marrying this woman, after all. But it was too late to go on. He looked past her hair, a last time, at the doorway. But his eyes returned to her face. Now he had to take her with him. He had to find out what she did all day. He was unaccountably afraid to look at her as he said this, so he squinted at his watch and said, "Why don't we have a drink somewhere? It's time." Lin had made flowery days of the summer. Intense, electric evenings sprang fiercely into the sheltered heart of the dense foliage outside Cyl's window. The nights slid away from the circle of the week as quickly as the delicate balance of midnight was disturbed. In the fall, when Cyl looked out and saw the ice-cream man and the children and the shoppers running before red leaves in the wind, he told Lin that he was determined to marry her immediately. Every day Cyl discovered that he was wrong when he decided that one or another part of her face or body was most beautiful. One morning he was convinced her lips were so cool and fragrant that the rest of the day must be evil to soften them. And that night as he watched sleep invade that same flesh he was sorry to see the effects of the day's experiences erased... noises in the great ThoughtTransfer machine were unwelcome in CyPs life now, because there was no life. None that he wanted. The loud speakers were blaring the name of Cyl Mar! The Board had written his name on the blank check and had cast a huge picture of it on the back wall of the auditorium, for the spectators to see on their way out. The contest was over. He had forgotten all about the contest. Grus? He had forgotten all about Grus. There was only memory and Lin. Stunned, Cyl heard himself being asked for a few words and he felt his lips say the same things he had always said. They let him go, he stumbled past Grus, who was collecting all his certificates, credit cards, and prizes for runner-up. The crowd was leaving in a vast, swelled murmur. He wanted to get away, lock himself in his cubicle and rave at himself as a fool screams at a fool, louder, louder! Make faces at himself, feel his face with his hands, as though the physical world which he had seemed to reject would believe this sort of proof that he recognized it. But all the indirect, mystic, or magical tricks would never bring her back. Exhausted, he stood on the edge of the stage, where the gray seats stretched away from him like waves in a sea. The crowd was gone, the auditorium empty. The technicians behind him were testing the equipment, before switching off. One of the mechanics wore the thought helmet, projecting plush leather, red wine, and ivory women on the screen, smiling. Cyl did not move. He looked up and yet further up through the empty auditorium. It was not quite empty. His breath tightened, and his heart moved in the hollowness. A single person sat alone in the very last row. The person did not move. The person looked back down over the emptiness, reaching as Cyl was reaching. She was very beautiful. Lin. She had decided to go, had walked out forever, because she had thought Grus was right, because she was ashamed. But once outside, she had paused, thought Cyl, and gone to the balcony to watch, to see all of it, to know the rest. Lin. Lin. She sat above, quiet. He did not trust himself to call out to her. He turned to the machine, the technicians, the helmet. Quietly, he took the helmet, placed it on his head. He closed his eyes. He knew what he could, what he must, paint there on the screen. And there it was for her. There it happened for her eyes. On the screen, a picture of himself walking off the stage and up the aisle. And a picture of her getting up from her place in the balcony and walking out through the door and down the quiet stairs. Himself coming out into the lobby, their meeting. And now they were taking each others' hands, warm and belonging, and now they were kissing, now moving silently past the cool fountains, out of the theatre. He opened his eyes and removed the helmet. A glance told him that, in the balcony, Lin was already suiting action to the image. She rose. She was smiling. She turned and walked. Cyl stepped down from the stage. He started up the aisle. Then, he was running. (Continued from page #) ly don't know." But the two spacemen, though they didn't refer to it -- were not concerned with the body so much as the aura of completeness, the radiation of contentment which came from somewhere within. And it was passing strange that nothing more was said about the Professor returning to Earth. No great revelation, suddenly arrived at, that he would not go. Rather, they discussed various things, that three gentlemen, meeting casually, would discuss. Then Professor Pettibone arose from his chair and said, "It was kind of you to drop off and see me. And one of the spacemen replied, "A pleasure, sir. A real pleasure indeed." Then the Professor left the ship and watched it lift up on a tail of red fire and go away. He raised an arm and waved. "Say hello for me," he called. Then he turned away and, from force of habit, he began again to polish the hull, knowing that he would keep it shining, and be proud of it, for many years to come. Almost beyond reach of the planet, one of the spacemen flipped a switch and put certain sensitive communication mechanisms to work. So sensitive, they could pick up etheric vibrations far away and make them audible. But only faintly, came the pleasant voice of a contented man : "Good morning bright sunshine, We're glad you are here. You make the world... Specific Gravity of Space # miliar concept of comparing the weight of a thing or substance with an equal volume of water, is widely used, but it isn't often that you find such a computation made in connection with all of space! Cosmologists, however, are interested in discovering the distribution of matter throughout the universe and it is a valuable piece of knowledge to have some idea of the "specific gravity", or density (to be correct), of matter in that vast volume of nothingness. Someone will immediately question the idea with "but you don't know how big Space is!" That's true; yet telescopes can probe hunof light-years into space and they can sample a big enough volume to make the concept "density of the universe" perfectly valid. Subsequent penetration of space -- if that's possible and the universe is not finite -- is not likely to change the figure by much. It turns out that the density is -- as you would suspect -- fantastically low. After all there is a lot of empty space to consider. In technical terms the density is about ten to the centimeter -- or, in familiar terms, about a pound of matter to the volume occupied by thirty thousand Earths! That is rareness and vacuity indeed! Nevertheless, when you consider the total volume of the known universe, that's a lot of stuff. Assuming that the light-years in diameter -- and it's certainly more than this -- all you need do is apply the formula for the volume of a sphere -- fourthirds pi times the radius cubed -- and you come up with an answer in cubic light-years which literally takes your breath away. The specific gravity of the universe is mighty, mighty low... Who Needs Gravity? Force recently revealed data and photographs showing that live animals -- mice and monkeys -- had been sent up in V-# and Aerobee rockets to altitudes of # miles, to test their reactions at zero gravity. Even though they were subjected to a brief, one-second acceleration of about # g and a force of # to # g, which lasted for # seconds, the animals showed absolutely no unusual aftereffects from the experimental flight. One of the photographs made available shows a mouse floating in a plastic drum. Since the walls of the drum were glassy smooth, the animal was unable to gain a foothold and was undoubtedly in a state of helpless panic. Another photograph shows a mouse in an adjoining section of the drum. This section had a shelf, and the second mouse was able to take firm hold, stay calm, and keep his equilibrium while the rocket shot through the weightless period. The results of these experiments, plus others in which several humans took part in jet fighter planes, lead to the conclusion that it is undoubtedly possible for man to be able to stand for brief periods the gravity-free state expected in rocket flight to the outer atmosphere. But he must have something to hang on to. Properly secured in the aircraft, he should be able to function normally during brief periods of zero gravity, and without difficulty should be able to perform any operations that would be necessary to pilot the craft. Why Rotation Varies tuation occurring periodically in the earth's rate of rotation has puzzled scientists. Recent studies of the optical properties of the mineral olivine under high pressures, however, give some idea of what the electrical conductivity at earth's center is like -- and there is now a possible explanation to the fluctuations : It may be due to the activity of an electromagnetic coupling which is located between the mantle of the earth and earth's liquid center. According to evidence which scientists have carefully gathered, it is probable that the earth's mantle consists in great part of the mineral olivine. Under normal conditions olivine acts as an insulator, but the high temperatures raging within the earth are strong enough to change its properties there so that it becomes a conductor. The electrical conductivity of the earth's mantle plays an important role in many geophysical phenomena, one of which of course is to provide the electromagnetic coupling between the mantle of the earth and the center of the earth, and the resulting activity of the coupling, which may possibly explain the variance in the earth's rate of rotation. Unknown Universe? astronomers have been working on for almost # years, there are stars in the sky that do not twinkle. This means there may be as many invisible as visible stars in the universe, thus indicating that it is entirely possible that there exists a duplicate universe, of which we have no knowledge. A British research foundation, in conjunction with the British government, has recently announced they are building a giant radio-telescope, at a cost of approximately #. With this huge instrument, scientists will try to locate the invisible stars. These may be radio stars, or dark stars. They may be stars in the process of being born or of dying. They may even be some completely new type of object of which our astronomers have no previous knowledge. Birth of a Star Nature's offspring, a star is formed almost purely by accident. It begins to be created when interstellar gases in a cloud are brought together unevenly. The embryo star adds to its mass by picking up other gases as it makes its way through the cloud. It grows fast, and eventually moves out of its parent cloud and into a free space which has only irregular dottings of gas clouds. According to a recent lecture by Professor Fred Hoyle of St. John's College in Cambridge, England, further growth of the star by the addition of external material, once it has left its parent cloud, is fairly rare. Perhaps one star in a hundred will experience a second period of growth, while only one in a ond and a third growth. The second period stars become moderately large. The stars that get to an exceptionally high mass, however, are the three-period stars. That Old Bloodthirsty Mother Goose ture's benign old lady of letters -- is actually a bloodthirsty vampire. Very few persons realize that the traditional nursery rhymes, which have been used for generations to amuse and entertain innocent childhood, are filled with an overwhelming amount of villainous references, of death and violence and shocking horrors, masquerading under a mask of innocence. Geoffrey Handley-Taylor, founder of the British Poetry-Drama Guild, is an active crusader for the reform of the old-fashioned nursery rhymes. Out of # famous traditional nursery rhymes which he recently studied in detail, he says at least # of them contain "unsavory elements". A detailed listing of their contents include : # allusions to death, violence and depravity, including eight cases of murder, two cases of choking to death, three of death by drowning, one each of death by devouring, decapitation, squeezing, cutting a human being in half, starvation, shrivelling, boiling, and hanging. There's even a blow for starryeyed newlyweds, in one rhyme, which contains an allusion to marriage being another form of death. Today's radio and television programs of horror and suspense -- which are bringing such loud protests of disapproval from parents -- can well take a back seat to the old classics for children. -- Peter Dakin I #t#KCl#l  Dear Sirs: An item in IF, September # issue (Science Briefs) on the subject of optical sandblasting proved to be of considerable interest to me. Mr. Recour refers to the technique devised by Dr. Wm. A. Rhodes. I have made many telescope mirrors (all by the "old hat" method) and quite naturally the Doctor's technique (and its apparent time-saving) opens up new possibilities for amateur telescope makers, including myself. As Director of the Amateur Telescope Makers' Group in Toronto, Ontario, I have watched the rapid growth of public interest in the hobby, hand in hand with the also rapid development of time-and-effort-saving apparatus for making the mirror. The process of grinding has by no means been the least of the deterrents to amateurs, because of the relatively long period of work required without any apparent approach to the finished product. Consequently, I feel sure that my fellow amateurs will consider Dr. Rhodes' method of sandblasting the base curve a useful advance in the mirror technique, especially in the larger sizes. While the possibility of sandblasting is not entirely new to us, no actual experimentation (that I know of) has ever proved successful in Canada. Hence, we would appreciate any information you can give us on the Doctor's method. -- L. H. Clarke # Hillsdale Ave. Toronto, Canada No doubt Dr. Rhodes and other interested readers would like to exchange notes with Mr. Clarke. Dear Sir: Enclosed you will find one slightly battered and beat-up money order. It was originally bought in Korea # # months ago but, just as it was about to be put into an envelope, several incoming rounds of enemy artillery followed by a call for a rather actively interesting combat patrol caused it to be misplaced. It finally turned up when I was looking through some old letters a few days ago. It is made out for #, enough for a subscription for # issues. I have just finished the November issue of IF. Very good; I liked especially the makeup and clear type which made the issue very easy to read. I won't list the stories in order of preference except to say that "The Image and the Likeness" was definitely the best and the feature on Leonardo da Vinci was very interesting. A full length article with a few diagrams of some of his inventions would be good for a later issue. Or how about Nostradamus and his predictions? You have an attractive, flexible magazine. Keep up the good work. #, Jacksonville, Florida That poor little old money order was good as gold. We hope you # ll find IF comparably good. Sirs: Inclosed find my check for #, for which please send me # issues of IF, beginning with the January number. The November number is the only copy of any science fiction magazine which does not use the word "extrapolate" even once -- for which receive my congratulations. What is it about that word that bewitches science fiction writers? One doesn't encounter it often in other fiction. Is it a sort of code in sf? Even writers whose knowledge of English grammar is a bit shaky manage to use it; in fact, especially writers in that category. The Image and the Likeness is a beautiful bit of allegory as well as a touching story. Such flights of fancy justify science fiction as literature. With good wishes to your magazine (but I do hate the sexy covers). -- Phoebe H. Gilkyson Mont Clare, Penn. Dear Mr. Quinn: The modem Gulliver story titled The Image and the Likeness is quite well written. My congratulations to Campbell for achieving verisimilitude in the character Kazu. Most characters in stf make me think of the joke (?) concerning the comment of an editor on a manuscript. Remember it? The Writer had inserted the law-suit preventative "All characters appearing in this story are fictional. Any similarity to actual persons is cofticidental." The plagued editor penciled a note, "That's the trouble," and tearfully inserted said script in the outgoing mail basket. The sketch on da Vinci is excellent. The cover is poor in all over effect for me, although the balance of color is excellent. The staring eyes convey neither attraction nor horror and the foreshortened arms look like flippers. The bodies are neither opaque (witness planet line on legs) nor transparent, since solid continents in background are obliterated by trunks and Bell-jarred headdress. -- Alice Bullock # Gildersleeve Santa Fe, New Mexico To the Editor: I was very impressed with your leading novel in the November issue. It was easily the most absorbing story I have yet read on the theme of Atomic mutation. The best story in the issue, though, was The Running Hounds . Indeed a vivid portrayal of the changes which could take place in a culture as the result of highly technological warfare. I'd like to commend IF on its good discretion in stories. It's good to see that, as is true in some magazines, the so-called gimmick is not allowed to overshadow the characterization and the interplay of people. For my money, although I know you can't please everybody, you can dispense with the humorous stories. I've read very few in my time which I believe were very successful. Your covers are improving with each issue, the November one being the best so far. I think, and again I realize that you can't please everyone, that the cover should illustrate one of the stories, not necessarily the leading novel. You'll be receiving my subscription. -- Robert Maider Hamilton College Clinton, New York Our cover policy was explained in the March issue. Regarding humor  we need it sometimes , hut agree that it has to he well handled. Dear Sir: Your November issue of IF was tops in my opinion. I've read the mag ever since its inception and have followed its progress with interest. The cover... is absolutely the best yet. It attracted me with such intensity at the newsstands that I frankly felt the interior could not live up to such a dazzling cover-picture. Happy to say, the stories were of equal calibre. The Image and the Likeness was the best of the issue by a good # feet. Seldom have I read a story as realistic and enthralling as this one during my ten years of avid stf reading. This one was so good that even raving about it would be an understatement... The Running Hounds was next on my list. A well turned tale, one that stays in my mind and suggests the possibility of a sequel... Brother to the Machine was next in preference; a hauntingly written story. If this issue of IF is any yardstick I would say you have achieved what some of the other mags in the field are clamoring (falsely) that they have... quality in material. Your inside covers are very welcome. I hope they continue. Your Personalities in Science feature is excellent. This is quite a statement coming from someone who avoids features like the plague. This one is being handled very nicely. The Postman Cometh is just right in length. I find when a mag starts printing poor quality stories they enlarge their readers' column, probably so the readers will have some reason to buy the mag. Keep yours short and your stories good and you'll have few complaints from this comer. Definitely compliments on the November IF. -- Jan Gardner Apredelon Canterbury, N. H. explorer. Its hostile atmosphere of ammonia and methane, coupled with a seething volcanic surface, promises to make any attempt at landing highly improbable. In this space scene, an exploration rocket streaks over Jupiter's bulk, approximately # miles above its equator. In the background above the rocket are three of Jupiter's eleven moons, all of which seem to invite comparatively safe exploration. (Drawings by Ed Valigursky) Why puzzle lovers are having more fun than ever before are these two unusual puzzle publication One of America's greatest values! Chock full of fun -- # pages with over # puzzles of every variety in every issue. Also articles and special features of fascinating interest to every puzzle lover. Another wonderful puzzle magazine with a new and exciting selection of puzzles, quizzes, brain teasers, articles and features! # pages of delightful excursion into puzzle pleasure. Try it and see for yourself. # mm newt eUafotf only #c everywhere  probable completely airless. Jagged cliffs rise thousands of feet above a surface pockmarked with volcanic craters. The men pictured are scaling one of the less formidable peaks, while their ship lies in the valley far below, A Mercurian day is of the same duration as its year -- # Earth days. Ail Stories New and Complete Cover by Ken Fagg: A Volcanic Eruption on Titan, Sixth Moon of Saturn I Apostolides s IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn Publishing Co., Inc. Office of publication, # Lord Street, Buffalo, New York. Entered as Second Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York. Subscription # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere #. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction; any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. Not responsible for unsolicited artwork or manuscripts. #c a copy. Printed in U.S. A. Next issue on sale July #th # I # I # I # I #I I # I # I #I I # I # I # I # I # I # I S ometimes a body gets to wondering just what progress really is. In this case, my confusion is about one of those new, super-duper fountain pens, made by one of America's oldest pen and pencil makers. The one I have in mind is right on the desk before me. It's a desk pen -- a pretty thing, black, onyx-like base, magnetic marble, which holds the penholder in any position, and a slim, sleek, black pen with a chrome band around the middle. It has a truly graceful, futuristic, pace-setting feel and appearance. But, boy-oh-boy-oh-boy! That pretty thing is more trouble to fill than an old-fashioned Saturdaynight-bath tub with an old oaken bucket from an old time, pulleyworking dug-well. You've no doubt had experiences with one like it. If you haven't, here's how it works: First, you gotta have special ink for it -- made by the maker of the pen. Then, you unscrew the top of the pen and find a plunger. This plunger is special. No once-down-and-release like the good old-time pens of fifteen, twenty or twenty-five years ago. This special, super plunger requires nine plunges, holding the point submerged all the while. And each time you "plunge", you gotta allow a couple seconds on the release for it to suck in ink. The ninth time, you remove it from the ink and then release the plunger. No variations, now, and no short cuts ! Should you lose count because your phone rings or something, you have to start all over from scratch. You can't fool that pen! Oh, you get used to it after a while. All you gotta do is practice. Like on Saturdays and Sundays and during your lunch hour. You gradually become quite proficient. I've had mine for two years and I'm pretty good. I average a penful of ink three out of every five times I perform the operation. And yet, no matter how assinine I think it is, I reckon it is probably better than the old fashioned type that had a little lever or plunger, which you worked once -- with your eyes shut and without mumbling a count and using anybody's ink -- and you had a penful that would write a long time. After all, that was much too simple. Oh, yes, I've also got a pocket job, with a super, trick-redoesn't take in as much ink as any self-respecting wreck you use to fill out money order forms in post offices around the country. But it looks nice when I take it out of my pocket and let it rest on the table while I borrow somebody else's equipment to write with. said, "Everybody complains about the weather, but nobody does anything about it". That pretty much applies to this thing we call "time". You've heard that familiar gripe: "Where the heck does the time go?" Or, "How time flies!" Or, "There ought to be more than # hours in a day!" Anyhow, you get the idea. But did you ever stop to think that we're putting the cart before the horse. Time ain't flying at all. We're flying. "Time" is an invention of our civilization. It is relative to action, movement, music, geology, mathematics, life, etc., etc. Out in space, out in the infinite, there is no time -- as we know it. Let the earth change its rotation and we'd have a heck of a "time" with our clocks, calendars, sundials, egg cookers, etc. Anyhow, I suppose this thought was suggested by a line I remembered from a swell movie I saw recently. The movie was Breaking Through the Sound Barrier, and the scene is that of the test pilot looking through a telescope, stationed in the private observatory of a manufacturer of jet planes. After a while of intense watching, he says something to the years out there, they are living in the past. The manufacturer, sitting nearby, hears him and looks up. There is a dreamy expression on his face. "My boy," he said, "out there is the past, the present, and the future." We make our own time. So It is we who fly. Breaking Through the Sound Barrier, incidentally, is a picture anyone interested in science, factual or fictional, will enjoy seeing. It has all the basic emotions, plus some new ones. I've been up in planes doing over # miles per hour, at over # feet, but that was nowhere near the thrill of watching this movie. The camera takes you through phases of man's breathless quest for speed, it gives you a lookin on the development of mighty engines, and it introduces you to a philosophical equation of man, nature and machinery. And when the camera takes you inside a plane screaming through space # feet up, hurtling life and machine against the sound barrier -- well it's the next best thing to actually being up there. In fact, it's better. Personally, you couldn't get me up surance policy. Watching it from a safe, comfortable seat in a movie house was enough for me. flying seems to me to be in these small personal jobs. A friend of mine has a small four-seater Stinson and the time he took me up I behaved like a three-year old on his first ride on a merry-go-round. Flying at # to # miles per hour at # to # feet gives you the excitement of contrast. You follow roads, rivers, railroad tracks, pick out familiar landmarks; you see life below with a fascinating perspective which is never possible in the big, fast planes. Besides, to reiterate, I never am in #-miles-per-hour worth of hurry. -- jlq Wilbur Murphy sought romance, excitement, and an impossible Horseman of Space. With polite smiles, the planet frustrated him at every turn -- until he found them all the hard way! By Jack Vance duction Director of Know Your Universe!, was a man of sudden unpredictable moods; and Sam Gatlin, the show's Continuity Editor, had learned to expect the worst. "Sam," said Frayberg, "regarding the show last night..." He paused to seek the proper words, and Gatlin relaxed. Frayberg's frame of mind was merely critical. "Sam, we're in a rut. What's worse, the show's dull!" Sam Gatlin shrugged, not committing himself. "Seaweed Processors of Alphard IX -- who cares about seaweed?" "It's factual stuff," said Sam, defensive but not wanting to go too far out on a limb. "We bring 'em everything -- color, fact, romance, sight, sound, smell... Next week, it's the Ball Expedition to the Mixtup Mountains on Gropus." Frayberg leaned forward. "Sam, we're working the wrong slant on this stuff... , . We've got to loosen up, sock 'em! Shift our ground! Give 'em the old human angle -- glamor, mystery, thrills!" Sam Gatlin curled his lips. "I got just what you want." "Yeah? Show me." Gatlin reached into his waste basket. "I filed this just ten minutes ago..." He smoothed out the pages. " 'Sequence idea, by Wilbur Murphy. Investigate "Horseman of Space," the man who rides up to meet incoming spaceships'." Frayberg tilted his head to the side. "Rides up on a horse?" "That's what Wilbur Murphy says." "How far up?" "Does it make any difference?" "Nev -- I guess not." "Well, for your information, it's up ten thousand, twenty thousand miles. He waves to the pilot, takes off his hat to the passengers, then rides back down." "And where does all this take place?" "On -- on -- " Gatlin frowned. "I can write it, but I can't pronounce it." He printed on his scratch"Sirgamesk," read Frayberg. Gatlin shook his head. "That's what it looks like -- but those consonants are all aspirated gutturals. It's more like 'Hrrghameshgrrh'." "Where did Murphy get this tip?" "I didn't bother to ask." "Well," mused Frayberg, "we could always do a show on strange superstitions. Is Murphy around?" "He's explaining his expense account to Shifkin." "Get him in here; let's talk to him." blond crew-cut, a broad freckled nose, and a serious sidelong squint. He looked from his crumpled sequence idea to Gatlin and Frayberg. "Didn't like it, eh?" "We thought the emphasis should be a little different," explained Gatlin. "Instead of 'The Space Horseman,' we'd give it the working title, 'Odd Superstitions of Hrrghameshgrrh'." "Oh, hell!" said Frayberg. "Gall it Sirgamesk." "Anyway," said Gatlin, "that's the angle." "But it's not superstition," said Murphy. "Oh, come, Wilbur..." "I got this for sheer sober-sided fact. A man rides a horse up to meet the incoming ships!" "Where did you get this wild fable?" "My brother-in-law is purser on the Celestial Traveller. At Riker's Planet they make connection with the feeder line out of Girgamesg." "Wait a minute," said Gatlin. "How did you pronounce that?" "Girgamesg. The steward on the shuttle-ship gave out this story, and my brother-in-law passed it along to me." "Somebody's pulling somebody's leg." "My brother-in-law wasn't, and the steward was cold sober." "They've been eating bhang. Sirgamesk is a Javanese planet, isn't it?" "Javanese, Arab, Malay." "Then they took a bhang supply with them, and hashish, chat, and a few other sociable herbs." "Well, this horseman isn't any drug-dream." "No? What is it?" "So far as I know it's a man on a horse." "Ten thousand miles up? In a vacuum?" "Exactly." "No space-suit?" "That's the story." Gatlin and Frayberg looked at each other. "Well, Wilbur," Gatlin began. Frayberg interrupted. "What we can use, Wilbur, is a sequence on Sirgamesk superstition. Emphasis on voodoo or witchcraft -- naked girls dancing -- stuff with roots in Earth, but now typically Sirgamesk. Lots of color. Secret rite stuff..." "Not much room on Girgamesc for secret rites." "It's a big planet, isn't it?" "Not quite as big as Mars. There's no atmosphere. The settlers live in mountain valleys, with airtight lids over 'em." Gatlin flipped the pages of Thumbnail Sketches of the Inhabited Worlds. "Says here there's When the atmosphere went, the population went with it." Frayberg became animated. "There's lots of material out there! Go get it, Wilbur! Life! Sex! Excitement! Mystery!" "Okay," said Wilbur Murphy. "But lay off this horseman-inspace. There b a limit to public credulity, and don't you let anyone tell you different." port, twenty thousand miles ahead. The steward leaned over Wilbur Murphy's shoulder and pointed a long brown finger. "It was right out there, sir. He came riding up -- " "What kind of a man was it? Strange looking?" "No. He was Cirgameski." "Oh. You saw him with your own eyes, eh?" The steward bowed, and his loose white mantle fell forward. "Exactly, sir." "No helmet, no space-suit?" "He wore a short Singhalut vest and pantaloons and a yellow Hadrasi hat. No more." "And the horse?" "Ah, the horse! There's a different matter." "Different how?" "I can't describe the horse. I was intent on the man." "Did you recognize him?" "By the brow of Lord Allah, it's well not to look too closely when such matters occur." "Then -- you did recognize him!" "I must .be at my task, sir." Murphy frowned in vexation at the steward's retreating back, then bent over his camera to check the tape-feed. If anything appeared now, and his eyes could see it, the Know Your Universe! could see it with him. When he looked up, Murphy made a frantic grab for the stanchion, then relaxed. Cirgamesg had taken the Great Twitch. It was an illusion, a psychological quirk. One instant the planet lay ahead; then a man winked or turned away, and when he looked back, "ahead" had become "below"; the planet had swung an astonishing ninety degrees across the sky, and they were falling! Murphy leaned against the stanchion. " 'The Great Twitch' ," he muttered to himself, "I'd like to screens!" Several hours passed. CirgamesQ grew. The Sampan Range rose up like a dark scab; the valley sultanates of Singhalut, Hadra, New Batavia, and Boeng-Bohot showed like glistening chickentracks ; the Great Rift Colony of Sundeman stretched down through the foothills like the trail of a slug. A loudspeaker voice rattled the ship. "Attention passengers for Singhalut and other points on Cirgamesg! Kindly prepare your luggage for disembarkation. Customs at Singhalut are extremely thorough. Passengers are warned to take no weapons, drugs or explosives ashore. This is important!" T he warning turned out to be an understatement. Murphy was plied with questions. He suffered search of an intimate nature. He was three-dimensionally Xrayed with a range of frequencies calculated to excite fluorescence in whatever object he might have secreted in his stomach, in a hollow bone, or under a layer of flesh. His luggage was explored with similar minute attention, and Murphy rescued his cameras with difficulty. "What're you so damn anxious about? I don't have drugs; I don't have contraband..." "It's guns, your excellency. Guns, weapons, explosives..." "I don't have any guns." "But these objects here?" "They're cameras. They record pictures and sounds and smells." The inspector seized the cases with a glittering smile of triumph. "They resemble no cameras of my experience; I fear I shall have to impound..." A young man in loose white pantaloons, a pink vest, pale green cravat and a complex black turban strolled up. The inspector made a swift obeisance, with arms spread wide. "Excellency," The young man raised two fingers. "You may find it possible to spare Mr. Murphy any unnecessary formality." "As your Excellency recommends..." The inspector nimbly repacked Murphy's belongings, while the young man looked on benignly. Murphy covertly inspected his face. The skin was smooth, the color of the rising moon; the eyes were narrow, dark, superficially placid. The effect was of silken punctilio with hot ruby blood close beneath. Satisfied with the inspector's zeal, he turned to Murphy. "Allow me to introduce myself, Tuan Murphy. I am Ali-Tomas, of the House of Singhalut, and my father the Sultan begs you to accept our poor hospitality." "Why, thank you," said Murphy. "This is a very pleasant surprise." "If you will allow me to conduct you..." He turned to the inspector. "Mr. Murphy's luggage to the palace." M urphy accompanied AliTomas into the outside light, fitting his own quick step to the prince's feline saunter. This is coming it pretty soft, he said to himself. I'll have a magnificent suite, with bowls of fruit and gin pahits, not to mention two or three silken girls with skin like rich cream bringing me towels in the shower... Well, well, well, it's not so bad working for Know Your Universe! aiter all! I suppose I ought to unlimber my camera... Prince Ali-Tomas watched him with interest. "And what is the audience of Know Your Universe IT' "We call 'em 'participants'." "Expressive. And how many participants do you serve?" "Oh, the Bowdler Index rises and falls. We've got about two hundred "Fascinating! And tell me -- how do you record smells?" Murphy displayed the odor recorder on the side of the camera, with its gelatinous track which fixed the molecular design. "And the odors recreated -- they are like the originals?" "Pretty close. Never exact, but none of the participants knows the difference. Sometimes the synthetic odor is an improvement." "Astounding!" murmured the prince. "And sometimes... Well, Carson Tenlake went out to get the myrrhblossoms on Venus. It was a hot day -- as days usually are on Venus -- and a long climb. When the show was run off, there was more smell of Carson than of flowers." Prince Ali-Tomas laughed politely. "We turn through here." They came out into a compound paved with red, green and white tiles. Beneath the valley roof was a sinuous trough, full of haze and warmth and golden light. As far in either direction as the eye could reach, the hillsides were terraced, barred in various shades of green. Spattering the valley floor were tall canvas pavilions, tents, booths, shelters. "Naturally," said Prince AliTomas, "we hope that you and your participants will enjoy Singhalut. It is a truism that, in order to import, we must export; we wish to encourage a pleasurable response to the 'Made in Singhalut' tag on our batiks, carvings, lacquers." They rolled quietly across the square in a surface-car displaying the House emblem. Murphy rested against deep, cool cushions. "Your inspectors are pretty careful about weapons." Ali-Tomas smiled complacently. "Our existence is ordered and peaceful. You may be familiar with the concept of adak?" "I don't think so." "A word, an idea from old Earth. Every living act is ordered by ritual. But our heritage is passionate -- and when unyielding adak stands in the way of an irresistible emotion, there is turbulence, sometimes "An amok." "Exactly. It is as well that the amok has no weapons other than his knife. Otherwise he would kill twenty where now he kills one." The car rolled along a narrow avenue, scattering pedestrians to either side like the bow of a boat spreading foam. The men wore loose white pantaloons and a short open vest; the women wore only the pantaloons. "Handsome set of people," remarked Murphy. Ali-Tomas again smiled complacently. "I'm sure Singhalut will present an inspiring and beautiful spectacle for your program." Murphy remembered the keynote to Howard Frayberg's instructions: "Excitement! Sex! Mystery!" Frayberg cared little for inspiration or beauty. "I imagine," he said casually, "that you celebrate a number of interesting festivals? Colorful dancing? Unique customs?" Ali-Tomas shook his head. "To the contrary. We left our superstitions and ancestor-worship back on Earth. We are quiet Mohammedans and indulge in very little festivity. Perhaps here is the reason for amoks and sjambaks.' "Sjambaks?" "We are not proud of them. You will hear sly rumor, and it is better that I arm you beforehand with truth." "What is a sjambak?" "They are bandits, flouters of authority. I will show you one prescntly." "I heard," said Murphy, "of a man riding a horse up to meet the spaceships. What would account for a story like that?" "It can have no possible basis," said Prince Ali-Tomas. "We have no horses on Cirgames. None whatever." "But..." "The veriest idle talk. Such nonsense will have no interest for your intelligent participants." The car rolled into a square a hundreds yards on a side, lined with luxuriant banana palms. Opposite was an enormous pavilion of gold and violet silk, with a dozen peaked gables casting various changing sheens. In the center of the square a twenty-foot pole supported a cage about two feet wide, three feet long, and four feet high. Inside this cage crouched a naked man. The car rolled past. Prince AliTomas waved an idle hand. The caged man glared down from bloodshot eyes. "That," said AliTomas, "is a sjambak. As you see," a faint note of apology entered his voice, "we attempt to discourage them." "What's that metal object on his chest?" "The mark of his trade. By that you may know all sjambak. In these unsettled times only we of the House may cover our chests -- all others must show themselves and declare themselves true Singhalusi." Murphy said tentatively, "I must come back here and photograph that cage." Ali-Tomas smilingly shook his head. "I will show you our farms, our vines and orchards. Your participants will enjoy these; they have no interest in the dolor of an ignoble sjambak." "Well," said Murphy, "our aim is a well-rounded production. We want to show the farmers at work, the members of the great House at their responsibilities, as well as the deserved fate of wrongdoers." "Exactly. For every sjambak there are ten thousand industrious Singhalusi. It follows then that only one ten-thousandth part of your film should be devoted to this infamous minority." "About three-tenths of a second, eh?" "No more than they deserve." "You don't know my Production Director. His name is Howard Frayberg, and... H oward frayberg was deep in conference with Sam Gatlin, under the influence of what Gatlin called his philosophic kick. It was the phase which Gatlin feared most. "Sam," said Frayberg, "do you know the danger of this business?" "Ulcers," Gatlin replied promptJyFrayberg shook his head. "We've got an occupational disease to fight -- progressive mental myopia." "Speak for yourself," said Gatlin. "Consider. We sit in this office. We think we know what kind of show we want. We send out our staff to get it. We're signing the checks, so back it comes the way we asked for it. We look at it, hear it, smell it -- and pretty soon we believe it ; our version of the universe, full-blown from our brains like Minerva stepping out of Zeus. You see what I mean?" "I understand the words." "We've got our own picture of what's going on. We ask for it, we get it. It builds up and up -- and finally we're like mice in a trap built of our own ideas. We cannibalize our own brains." "Nobody'll ever accuse you of being stingy with a metaphor." "Sam, let's have the truth. How many times have you been off Earth?" "I went to Mars once. And I spent a couple of weeks at Aristillus Resort on the Moon." Frayberg leaned back in his chair as if shocked. "And we're supposed to be a couple of learned planetologists !" Gatlin made grumbling noise in his throat. "I haven't been around the zodiac, so what? You sneezed a few minutes ago and I said gesundheit, but I don't have any doctor's degree." "There comes a time in a man's life," said Frayberg, "when he wants to take stock, get a new perspective." "Relax, Howard, relax." "In our case it means taking out our preconceived ideas, looking at them, checking our illusions against reality." "Are you serious about this?" "Another thing," said Frayberg, "I want to check up a little, ffiaifkin says the expense accounts are frightful. But he can't fight it. When Keeler says he paid ten munits for a loaf of bread on Nekkar IV, who's gonna call him on it?" "Hell, let him eat bread! That's cheaper than making a safari around the cluster, spot-checking the super-markets." Frayberg paid no heed. He touched a button; a three foot .sphere full of glistening motes appeared. Earth was at the center, with thin red lines, the scheduled space-ship routes, radiating out in all directions. "Let's see what kind of circle we can make," said Frayberg. "Gower's here at Canopus, Keeler's over here at Blue Moon, Wilbur Murphy's at Sirgamesk..." "Don't forget," muttered Gatlin, "we got a show to put on." "We've got material for a year," scoffed Frayberg. "Get hold of Space-Lines. We'll start with Sirgamesk, and see what Wilbur Murphy's up to." ing presented to the Sultan of Singhalut by the Prince Ali-Tomas. The Sultan, a small mild man of seventy, sat crosslegged on an enormous pink and green air-cushion. "Be at your ease, Mr. Murphy. We dispense with as much protocol here as practicable." The Sultan had a dry clipped voice and the air of a rather harassed corporation executive. "I understand you represent Earth-Central Home Screen Network?" "I'm a staff photographer for the Know Your Universe! show." "We export a great deal to Earth," mused the Sultan, "but not as much as we'd like. We're very pleased with your interest in us, and naturally we want to help you in every way possible. Tomorrow the Keeper of the Archives will present a series of charts analyzing our economy. Ali-Toms shall personally conduct you through the fish-hatcheries. We want you to know we're doing a great job out here on Singhalut." "I'm sure you are," said Murphy uncomfortably. "However, that isn't quite the stuff I want." "No? Just where do your desires lie?" Ali-Tomas said delicately. "Mr. Murphy took a rather profound interest in the sjambak displayed in the square." "Oh. And you explained that these renegades could hold no interest for serious students of our planet?" Murphy started to explain that clustered around two hundred million screens tuned to Know Your Universe! were four or five hungreater part of them neither serious nor students. The Sultan cut in decisively. "I will now impart something truly interesting. We Singhalusi are making preparations to reclaim four more valleys, with an added area of six hundred thousand acres! I shall put my physiographic models at your disposal; you may use them to the fullest extent!" "I'll be pleased for the opportunity," declared Murphy. "But tomorrow I'd like to prowl around the valley, meet your people, observe their customs, religious rites, courtships, funerals..." The Sultan pulled a sour face. "We are ditch-water dull. Festivals are celebrated quietly in the home; there is small religious fervor; courtships are consummated by family contract. I fear you will find little sensational material here in Singhalut." "You have no temple dances?" asked Murphy. "No fire-walkers, snake-charmers -- voodoo?" The Sultan smiled patronizingly. "We came out here to Cirgamesg to escape the ancient superstitions. Our lives are calm, orderly. Even the amoks have practically disappeared. "But the sjambaks -- " "Negligible." "Well," said Murphy, "I'd like to visit some of these ancient cities." "I advise against it," declared the Sultan. "They are shards, weathered stone. There are no inscriptions, no art. There is no stimulation in dead stone. Now. Tomorrow I will hear a report on hybrid soybean plantings in the Upper Kam District. You will want to be present." or even excelled his expectation. He had four rooms and a private garden enclosed by a thicket of bamboo. His bathroom walls were slabs of glossy actinolite, inlaid with cinnabar, jade, galena. pyrite and blue malachite, in representations of fantastic birds. His bedroom was a tent thirty feet high. Two walls were dark green fabric; a third was golden rust; the fourth opened upon the private garden. Murphy's bed was a pink and yellow creation ten feet square, soft as cobweb, smelling of rose sandalwood. Carved black lacquer tubs held fruit; two dozen wines, liquors, syrups, essences flowed at a touch from as many ebony spigots. The garden centered on a pool of cool water, very pleasant in the hothouse climate of Singhalut. The only shortcoming was the lack of the lovely young servitors Murphy had envisioned. He took it upon himself to repair this lack, and in a shady wine-house behind the palace, called the Barangipan, he made the acquaintance of a girlmusician named Soek Panjoebang. He found her enticing tones of quavering sweetness from the gamelan, an instrument well-loved in Old Bali. Soek Panjoebang had the delicate features and transparent skin of Sumatra, the supple long limbs of Arabia and in a pair of wide and golden eyes a heritage from somewhere in Celtic Europe. Murphy bought her a goblet of frozen shavings, each a different perfume, while he himself drank white rice-beer. Soek Panjoebang displayed an intense interest in the ways of Earth, and Murphy found it hard to guide the conversation. "Weelbrrr," she said. "Such a funny name, Weelbrrr. Do you think I could play the gamelan in the great cities, the great palaces of Earth?" "Sure. There's no law against gamelans." "You talk so funny, Weelbrrr. I like to hear you talk." "I suppose you get kinda bored here in Singhalut?" She shrugged. "Life is plea.sant, but it concerns with little things. We have no great adventures. We grow flowers, we play the gamelan." She eyed him archly sidelong. "We love... We sleep..." Murphy grinned. "You run amok." "No, no, no. That is no more." "Not since the sjambaks, eh?" "The sjambaks are bad. But better than amok. When a man feels the knot forming around his chest, he no longer takes his kris and runs down the street -- he becomes sjambak." This was getting interesting. "Where does he go? What does he do?" "He robs." "Who does he rob? What does he do with his loot?" She leaned toward him. "It is not well to talk of them." "Why not?" "The Sultan does not wish it... Everywhere are listeners. When one talks sjambak, the Sultan's ears rise, like the points on a cat." "Suppose they do -- what's the difference? I've got a legitimate interest. I saw one of them in that cage out there. That's torture. I want to know about it." "He is very bad. He opened the monorail car and the air rushed out. Forty-two Singhalusi and Hadrasi bloated and blew up." "And what happened to the sjambak?" "He took all the gold and money and jewels and ran away." "Ran where?" "Out across Great Pharasang Plain. But he was a fool. He came back to Singhalut for his wife; he was caught and set up for all people to look at, so they might tell each other, 'thus it is for sjambaks.' " "Where do the sjambaks hide out?" "Oh," she looked vaguely around the room, "out on the plains. In the mountains." "They must have some shelter -- an air-dome." "No. The Sultan would send out his patrol-boat and destroy them. They roam quietly. They hide among the rocks and tend their oxygen stills. Sometimes they visit the old cities." "I wonder," said Murphy, staring into his beer, "could it be sjambaks who ride horses up to meet the spaceship?" Soek Panjoebang knit her black eyebrows, as if preoccupied. "That's what brought me out here," Murphy went on. "This story of a man riding a horse out in space." "Ridiculous; we have no horses in Cirgamesg." "All right, the steward won't swear to the horse. Suppose the man was up there on foot or riding a bicycle. But the steward recognized the man." "Who was this man, pray?" "The steward clammed up... The name would have been just noise to me, anyway." "I might recognize the name... "Ask him yourself. The ship's still out at the field." She shook her head slowly, holding her golden eyes on his face. "I do not care to attract the attention of either steward, sjambak -- or Sultan." Murphy said impatiently. "In any event, it's not who -- but how. How does the man breathe? Vacuum sucks a man's lungs up out of his mouth, bursts his stomach, his ears..." "We have excellent doctors," said Soek Panjoebang shuddering, "but alas! I am not one of them." M urphy looked at her sharply. Her voice held the plangent sweetness of her instrument, with additional overtones of mockery. "There must be some kind of invisible dome around him, holding in air," said Murphy. "And what if there is?" "It's something new, and if it is, I want to find out about it." Soek smiled languidly. "You are so typical an old-lander -- worried, frowning, dynamic. You should relax, cultivate napau, enjoy life as we do here in Singhalut." "What's napau?" "It's our philosophy, where we find meaning and life and beauty in every aspect of the world." "That sjambak in the cage could do with a little less napau right now." "No doubt he is unhappy," she agreed. "Unhappy! He's being tortured!" "He broke the Sultan's law. His life is no longer his own. It belongs to Singhalut. If the Sultan wishes to use it to warn other wrongdoers, the fact that the man suffers is of small interest." "If they all wear that metal ornament, how can they hope to hide out?" He glanced at her own bare bosom. "They appear by night -- slip through the streets like ghosts... She looked in turn at Murphy's loose shirt. "You will notice persons brushing up against you, feeling you," she laid her hand along his breast, "and when this happens you will know they are agents of the Sultan, because only strangers and the House may wear shirts. But now, let me sing to you -- a song from the Old Land, old Java. You will not understand the tongue, but no other words so join the voice of the gamelan,"  Murphy. "Instead of a .garden suite with a private pool, I usually sleep in a bubble-tent, with nothing to eat but condensed food." Soek Panjoebang flung the water out of her sleek black hair. "Perhaps, Weelbrrr, you will regret leaving Cirgames?" "Well," he looked up to the transparent roof, barely visible where the sunlight collected and refracted, "I don't particularly like being shut up like a bird in an aviary... Mildly claustrophobic, I guess." After breakfast, drinking thick coffee from tiny silver cups, Murphy looked long and reflectively at Soek Panjoebang. "What are you thinking, Weelbrrr?" Murphy drained his coffee. "I'm thinking that I'd better be getting to work." "And what do you do?" "First I'm going to shoot the palace, and you sitting here in the garden playing your gamelan." "But Weelbrrr -- not me!" "You're a part of the universe, rather an interesting part. Then I'll take the square..." "And the sjambak?" A quiet voice spoke from behind. "A visitor, Tuan Murphy." Murphy turned his head. "Bring him in." He looked back to Soek Panjoebang. She was on her feet. "It is necessary that I go." "When will I see you?" "Tonight -- at the Barangipan." Rube Trimmer, Tuan." Trimmer was small and middleaged, with thin shoulders and a paunch. He carried himself with a hell-raising swagger, left over from a time twenty years gone. His skin had the waxy look of lost floridity, his tuft of white hair was coarse and thin, his eyelids hung in the off-side droop that amateur physiognomists like to associate with guile. "I'm Resident Director of the Import-Export Bank," said Trimmer. "Heard you were here and thought I'd pay my respects." "I suppose you don't see many strangers." "Not too many -- there's nothing much to bring 'em. CirgamesQ isn't a comfortable tourist planet. Too confined, shut in. A man with a sensitive psyche goes nuts pretty easy here." "Yeah' said Murphy. "I was thinking the same thing this naorning. That dome begins to give a stand it? Or do they?" Trimmer pulled out a cigar case, Murphy refused the offer. "Local tobacco," aid Trimmer. "Very good." He lit up thoughtfully. "Well, you might say that the Cirgamcski are schizophrenic. They've got the docile Javanese blood, plus the Arabian elan. The Javanese part is on top, but every once in a while you see a flash of arrogance... You never know. I've been out here nine years and Fm still a stranger." He puffed on his cigar, studied Murphy with his careful eves. "You work for Know Your Universe! y I hear," "Yeah. I'm one of the leg men," "Must be a great job." "A man sees a lot of the galaxy, and he runs into queer talcs, like this sjambak stuff." Trimmer nodded without surprise. "My advice to you, Murphy, is lay off the sjambaks. They're not healthy around here." Murphy was startled by the bluntness. "What's the big mystery about these sjambaks?" Trimmer looked around the room. "This place is bugged." "I found two pick-ups and plugged 'em," said Murphy. Trimmer laughed. "Those were just plants. They hide 'em vhere a man might just barely spot 'em. You can't catch the real ones. They're woven into the cloth -- pres suresensi tive wires .' ' Murphy looked critically at the cloth walls. "Don't let it worry you," said Trimmer. "They listen more out of habit than anything else. If you're fussy we'll go for a walk." The road led past the palace into the country. Murphy and Trimmer sauntered along a placid river, overgrown with lily pads, swarming with large wLite ducks. "This sjambak business," said Murphy. "Everybody talks around it. You can't pin anybody down." "Including me," said Trimmer. "I'm more or less privileged around here. The Sultan finances his reclamation through the bank, on the basis of my reports. But there's more to Sinahalut than the Sultan." "Namely?" Trimmer w'aved his cigar waggishly. "Now w-e're getting in where I don't like to talk. I'll give you a hint. Prince Ali thinks roofing-in more valleys is a waste of money, when there's Hadras and New Batavia and Sundaman so close," "You mean -- armed conquest?" Trimmer laughed. "You said it, not me." "They can't carry on much of a war -- unless the soldiers commute bv monorail." j "Maybe Prince Ali thinks he's got the answer." "Sjambaks?" "I didn't say it," said Trimmer blandly. Murphy grinned. After a moment he said, "I picked up with a girl named Soek Panjoebang who plays the gamelan. I suppose she's working for cither the Sultan or V J Pl'ince Ali. Do you know wliich?" Tiimmer's eyes sparkled. He shook his head. "Might be either one. There's a w'ay to find out." "Yeah?" "Get her off where you're sure there's no spy-cells. Tell her two things -- one for Ali, the other for the Sultan. Whichever one reacts you know you've got her tagged." "For instance?" "Well, for instance she learns that you can rig up a hypnotic ray from a flash-light battery, a piece of bamboo, and a fewlengths of wire. That'll get Ali in an awful sweat. He can't get weapons. None at all. And for the Sultan," Trimmer was warming up to his intrigue, chewing on his cigar with gusto, "tell her you're on to a catalyst that turns clay into aluminum and oxygen in the presence of sunlight. The Sultan would sell liis right leg for something like that. He tries hard for Singhalut and Cirgamesc." "And Ali?" Trimmer hesitated. "I never said what I'm gonna say. Don't forget -- I never said it." "Okay, you never said it." "Ever hear of a jehad "Mohammedan holy wars." "Believe it or not, Ali wants a jehad" "Sounds kinda fantastic." "Sure it's fantastic. Don't forget, I never said anything about it. But V suppose someone -- strictly unofficial, of course -- let the idea percolate around the Peace Office back home," "Ah," said Murphy. "That's why you came to see me."  injured innocence, "Noy, Murphy, you're a little unfair. I'm a friendly guy. Of course I don't like to see the bank lose what we've got tied up in the Sultan." "Why don't you send in a report yourself?" "I have! But when they hear the same thing from you, a Kiioiv Your Universe! man, they might make a move." Murphy nodded. "Well, we understand each other," said Trimmer heartily, "and everything's clear." "Not entirely. How's AH going to launch a jehad when he doesn't have any weapons, no warships, no supplies?" "Now," said Trimmer, "we're getting into the realm of supposition." He paused, looked behind him. A farmer pushing a rotary tiller, bowed politely, trundled ahed. Behind was a voung man in a black turban, gold earrings, a black and red vest, white pantaloon.s, black curl-toed slippers. He bowed, started past. Trimmer held up his hand. "Don't waste your time up there : we're going back in a few minutes." "Thank you, Tuan." "Who are you reporting to? The Sultan or Prince Ali?" "The Tuan is sure to pierce the veil of my evasions. I shall not disp semble. I am the Sultan's mam" Trimmer nodded. "Now. if you'll kindly remove to about a hundred yards, where your whisper pick-up won't work." "By your leave, I go." He retreated without haste. "He's almost certainly working for Ali," said Trimmer, "Not a very subtle lie." "Oh yes -- third level. He figured I'd take it second level," "How's that again?" "Naturally I wouldn't believe him. He knew I knew that he knew it. So when he said 'Sultan', I'd think he wouldn't lie simply, but that he'd lie double -- that he actually was working for the Sultan." Murphy laughed. "Suppose he told you a fourth level lie?" "It starts to be a toss-up pretty soon," Trimmer admitted. "I don't think he gives me credit for that much subtlety... What are you doing the rest of the day?" "Taking footage. Do you know where I can find some picturesque rites? Mystical dances, human sacrifice? I've got to work up some glamor and exotic lore." "There's this sjambak in the cage. That's about as close to the medieval as you'll find anywhere in Earth Commonwealth." "Speaking of sjambaks..." "No time," said Trimmer. "Got to get back. Drop in at my office -- right down the square from the palace." suite. The shadowy figure of his room servant said, "His Highness the Sultan desires the Tuan's attendance in the Cascade Garden." "Thank you," said Murphy. "As soon as I load my camera." The Cascade Room was an ppen patio in front of an artificial waterfall. The Sultan was pacing back and forth, wearing dusty khaki puttees, brown plastic boots, a yellow polo shirt. He carried a twig which he used as a riding crop, slapping his boots as he walked. He turned his head as Murphy appeared, pointed his twig at a wicker bench. "I pray you sit down, Mr. Murphy." He paced once up and back. "How is your suite? You find it to your liking?" "Very much so." "Excellent," said the Sultan. "You do me honor with your presence." Murphy waited patiently. "I understand that you had a visitor this morning," said the Sultan. "Yes. Mr. Trimmer." "May I inquire the nature of the conversation?" "It was of a personal nature," said Murphy, rather more shortly than he meant. The Sultan nodded wistfully. "A Singhalusi would have wasted an hour telling me half-truths -- distorted enough to confuse, but not sufficiently inaccurate to anger me if I had a spy-cell on him all the time." Murphy grinned. "A Singhalusi has to live here the rest of his life." A servant wheeled a frosted cabinet before them, placed goblets under two spigots, withdrew. The Sultan cleared his throat. "Trimmer is an excellent fellow, but unbelievably loquacious." Murphy drew himself two inches of chilled rosy-pale liquor. The Sultan slapped his boots with the twig. "Undoubtedly he confided all my private business to you, or at least as much as I have allowed him to learn." "Well -- he spoke of your hope to increase the compass of Singhalut." "That, my friend, is no hope; it's absolute necessity. Our population density is fifteen hundred to the square mile. We must expand or smother. There'll be too little food to eat, too little oxygen to breathe." Murphy suddenly came to life. "I could make that idea the theme of my feature! Singhalut Dilemma: Expand or Perish!" "No, that would be inadvisable, inapplicable." Murphy was not convinced. "It sounds like a natural." The Sultan smiled. "I'll impart an item of confidential information -- although Trimmer no doubt has preceded me with it." He gave his boots an irritated whack. "To expand I need funds. Funds are best secured in an atmosphere of calm and confidence. The implication of emergency would be disastrous to my aims." "Well," said Murphy, "I see your position." The Sultan glanced at Murphy sidelong. "Anticipating your cooperation, my Minister of Propaganda has arranged an hour's program, stressing our progressive social attitude, our prosperity and financial prospects..." "But, Sultan... "Well?" "I can't allow your Minister of Propaganda to use me and Know Your Universe! as a kind of investment brochure." The Sultan nodded wearily. "I expected you to take that attitude... Well -- what do you yourself haye in mind?" 'Tve been looking for something to tie to," .said Murphy. "I think it's going to be the dramatic contrast between the ruined cities and the new domed valleys. How the Earth settlers succeeded where the ancient people failed to meet the challenge of the dissipating atmosphere." "Well," the Sultan said grudgingly, "that's not too bad." "Today I want to take some shots of the palace, the dome, the city, the paddies, groves, orchards, farms. Tomorrow I'm taking a trip out to one of the ruins." "I see," said the Sultan. "Then you won't need my charts and statistics?" "Well, Sultan, I could film the stuff your Propaganda Minister cooked up, and I could take it back to Earth. Howard Frayberg or Sam Gatlin would tear into it, rip it apart, lard in some head-hunting, a little cannibalism and temple prostitution, and you'd never know you where watching Singhalut. You'd scream with horror, and I'd be fired." "In that case," said the Sultan, "I will leave you to the dictates of your conscience." H oward frayberg looked around the gray landscape of Riker's Planet, gazed out over the roaring black Mogador Ocean. "Sam, I think there's a story out there." Sam Gatlin shivered inside his electrically heated glass overcoat. "Out on that ocean? It's full of man-eating plesiosaurs -- horrible things forty feet long." "Suppose we worked something out on the line of Moby Dick? The White Monster of the Mogador Ocean. We'd set sail in a catamaran -- " "Us?" "Naturally I wouldn't believe him. He knew I knew that he knew it. So when he said 'Sultan', I'd think he wouldn't lie simply, but that he'd lie double -- that he actually was working for the Sultan." Murphy laughed. "Suppose he told you a fourth level lie?" "It starts to be a toss-up pretty soon," Trimmer admitted. "I don't think he gives me credit for that much subtlety... What are you doing the rest of the day?" "Taking footage. Do you know where I can find some picturesque rites? Mystical dances, human sacrifice? I've got to work up some glamor and exotic lore." "There's this sjambak in the cage. That's about as close to the medieval as you'll find anywhere in Earth Commonwealth." "Speaking of sjambaks..." "No time," said Trimmer. "Got to get back. Drop in at my office -- right down the square from the palace." suite. The shadowy figure of his room servant said, "His Highness the Sultan desires the Tuan's attendance in the Cascade Garden." "Thank you," said Murphy. "As soon as I load my camera." The Cascade Room was an ppen patio in front of an artificial waterfall. The Sultan was pacing back and forth, wearing dusty khaki puttees, brown plastic boots, a yellow polo shirt. He carried a twig which he used as a riding crop, slapping his boots as he walked. He turned his head as Murphy appeared. pointed his twig at a wicker bench. "I pray you sit down, Mr. Murphy." He paced once up and back. "How is your suite? You find it to your liking?" "Very much so." "Excellent," said the Sultan. "You do me honor with your presence." Murphy waited patiently. "I understand that you had a visitor this morning," said the Sultan. "Yes. Mr. Trimmer." "May I inquire the nature of the conversation?" "It was of a personal nature," said Murphy, rather more shortly than he meant. The Sultan nodded wistfully. "A Singhalusi would have wasted an hour telling me half-truths -- distorted enough to confuse, but not sufficiently inaccurate to anger me if I had a spy-cell on him all the time." Murphy grinned. "A Singhalusi has to live here the rest of his life." A servant wheeled a frosted cabinet before them, placed goblets under two spigots, withdrew. The Sultan cleared his throat. "Trimmer is an excellent fellow, but unbelievably loquacious." Murphy drew himself two inches of chilled rosy-pale liquor. The Sultan slapped his boots with the twig. "Undoubtedly he confided all my private business to you, or at least as much as I have allowed him to learn." "Well -- he spoke of your hope to increase the compass of Singhalut." "That, my friend, is no hope; it's absolute necessity. Our population density is fifteen hundred to the square mile. We must expand or smother. There'll be too little food to eat, too little oxygen to breathe." Murphy suddenly came to life. "I could make that idea the theme of my feature! Singhalut Dilemma: Expand or Perish!" "No, that would be inadvisable, inapplicable." Murphy was not convinced. "It sounds like a natural." The Sultan smiled. "I'll impart an item of confidential information -- although Trimmer no doubt has preceded me with it." He gave his boots an irritated whack. "To expand I need funds. Funds are best secured in an atmosphere of calm and confidence. The implication of emergency would be disastrous to my aims." "Well," said Murphy, "I see your position." The Sultan glanced at Murphy sidelong. "Anticipating your cooperation, my Minister of Propaganda has arranged an hour's program, stressing our progressive social attitude, our prosperity and financial prospects..." "But, Sultan... "Well?" "I can't allow your Minister of Propaganda to use me and Know Your Universe! as a kind of investment brochure." The Sultan nodded wearily. "I expected you to take that attitude... Well -- what do you yourself have in mind?" "I've been looking for something to tie to," said Murphy. "I think it's going to be the dramatic contrast between the ruined cities and the new domed valleys. How the Earth settlers succeeded where the ancient people failed to meet the challenge of the dissipating atmosphere." "Well," the Sultan said grudgingly, "that's not too bad." "Today I want to take some shots of the palace, the dome, the city, the paddies, groves, orchards, farms. Tomorrow I'm taking a trip out to one of the ruins." "I see," said the Sultan. "Then you won't need my charts and sta-' tistics?" "Well, Sultan, I could film the stuff your Propaganda Minister cooked up, and I could take it back to Earth. Howard Frayberg or Sam Gatlin would tear into it, rip it apart, lard in some head-hunting, a little cannibalism and temple prostitution, and you'd never know you where watching Singhalut. You'd scream with horror, and I'd be fired." "In that case," said the Sultan, "I will leave you to the dictates of your conscience." around the gray landscape of Riker's Planet, gazed out over the roaring black Mogador Ocean. "Sam, I think there's a story out there." Sam Gatlin shivered inside his electrically heated glass overcoat. "Out on that ocean? It's full of man-eating plesiosaurs -- horrible things forty feet long." "Suppose we worked somSthing out on the line of Moby Dick? The White Monster of the Mogador Ocean. We'd set sail in a catamaran -- " "Us?" "No," said Frayberg impatiently. "Of course not us. Two or three of the staff. They'd sail out there, look over these gray and red monsters, maybe fake a fight or two, but all the time they're after the legendary white one. How's it sound?" "I don't think we pay our men enough money." "Wilbur Murphy might do it. ing a horse up to meet his spaceships." "He might draw the line at a white plesiosaur riding up to meet his catamaran." Frayberg turned away. "Somebody's got to have ideas around here..." "We'd better head back to the space-port," said Gatlin. "We got two hours to make the Sirgamesk shuttle." Barangipan, watching marionettes performing to xylophone, Castanet, gong and gamelan. The drama had its roots in proto-historic Mohenjo-Dar#. It had filtered down through ancient India, medieval Burma, Malaya, across the Straits of Malacca to Sumatra and Java; from modern Java across space to CirgamesQ, five thousand years of time, two hundred lightyears of space. Somewhere along the route it had met and assimilated modern technology. Magnetic beams controlled arms, legs and bodies, guided the poses and posturings. The manipulator's face, by agency of clip, wire, radio control and minuscule selsyn, projected his scowl, smile, sneer or grimace to the peaked little face he controlled. The language was that of Old Java, which perhaps a third of the spectators understood. This portion did not include Murphy, and when the performance ended he was no wiser than at the start. Soek Panjoebang slipped into the seat beside Murphy. She wore musician's garb: a sarong of brown, blue, and black batik, and a fantastic headdress of tiny silver bells. She greeted him with enthusiasm. "Weelbrrr! I saw you watching..." "It was very interesting." "Ah, yes." She sighed. "Weelbrrr, you take me with you back to Earth? You make me a great picturama star, please, Weelbrrr?" "Well, I don't know about that." "I behave very well, Weelbrrr." She nuzzled his shoulder, looked soulfully up with her shiny yellowhazel eyes. Murphy nearly forgot the experiment he intended to perform. "What did you do today, Weelbrrr? You look at all the pretty girls?" "Nope. I ran footage. Got the palace, climbed the ridge up to the condensation vanes. I never knew there was so much water in the air till I saw the stream pouring off thosp vanes! And hot" "We have much sunlight; it makes the rice grow." "The Sultan ought to put some of that excess light to work. There's a secret process... Well, I'd better not say." "Oh come, Weelbrrr! Tell me your secrets!" "It's not much of a secret. Just a catalyst that separates clay into aluminum and oxygen when sunlight shines on it." Soek's eyebrows rose, poised in place like a seagull riding the wind. "Weelbrrr! I did not know you for a man of learning!" "Oh, you thought I was just a bum, eh? Good enough to make picturama stars out of gamelan players, but no special genius... "No, no, Weelbrrr." "I know lots of tricks. I can take a flashlight battery, a piece of copper foil, a few transistors and bamboo tube and turn out a paralyzer gun that'll stop a man cold in his tracks. And you know how much it costs?" "No, Weelbrrr. How much?" "Ten cents. It wears out after two or three months, but what's the difference? I make 'em as a hobby -- turn out two or three an hour." "Weelbrrr! You're a man of marvels! Hello! We will drink!" And Murphy settled back in the wicker chair, sipping his rice beer. I into a space-suit, and ride out to the ruins in the plain. Ghatamipol, I think they're called. Like to come?" "No, Weelbrrr." Soek Panjoebang looked off into the garden, her hands busy tucking a flower into her hair. A few minutes later she said, "Why must you waste your time among the rocks? There are better things to do and see. And it might well be -- dangerous." She murmured the last word offhandedly. "Danger? From the sjambaks?" "Yes, perhaps." "The Sultan's giving me a guard. Twenty men wiffi crossbows." "The sjambaks carry shields." "Why should they risk their lives attacking me?" Soek Panjoebang shrugged. After a moment she rose to her feet. "Goodbye, Weelbrrr." "Goodbye? Isn't this rather abrupt? Won't I see you tonight?" "If so be Allah's will." Murphy looked after the lithe swaying figure. She paused, plucked a yellow flower, looked over her shoulder. Her eyes, yellow as the flower, lucent as waterjewels, held his. Her face was utterly expressionless. She turned, tossed away the flower with a jaunty gesture, and continued, her shoulders swinging. Murphy breathed deeply. She might have made picturama at that... One hour later he met his escort at the valley gate. They were dressed in space-suits for the plains, twenty men with sullen faces. The trip to Ghatamipol clearly was not to their liking. Murphy climbed into his own suit, checked the oxygen pressure gauge, the seal at his collar. "All ready, boys?" No one spoke. The silence drew out. The gatekeeper, on hand to let the party out, snickered. "They're all ready, Tuan." "Well," said Murphy, "let's go then." Outside the gate Murphy made a second check of his equipment. No leaks in his suit. Inside pressure : #. Outside pressure; zero. His twenty guards morosely inspected their crossbows and slim swords. The white ruins of Ghatamipol lay five miles across Pharasang Plain. The horizon was clear, the sun was high, the sky was black. Murphy's radio hummed. Someone said sharply, "Look! There it goes!" He wheeled around; his guards had halted, and were pointing. He saw a fleet something vanishing into the distance. "Let's go," said Murphy. "There's nothing out there." "Sjambak." "'Well, there's only one of them." "Where one walks, others follow." "That's why the twenty of you are here." "It is madness! Challenging the sjambaks!" "What is gained?" another argued. "I'll be the judge of that," said Murphy, and set off along the plain. The warriors reluctantly followed, muttering to each other over their radio intercoms. T he eroded city walls rose above them, occupied more and more of the sky. The platoon leader said in an angry voice, "We have gone far enough." "You're under my orders," said Murphy. "We're going through the gate." He punched the button on his camera and passed under the monstrous portal. The city was frailer stuff than the wall, and had succumbed to the thin storms which had raged a million years after the passing of life. Murphy marvelled at the scope of the ruins. Virgin archaeological territory! No telling what a few weeks digging might turn up. Murphy considered his expense account. Shifkin was the obstacle. There'd be tremendous prestige and publicity for Know Your Universe! if Murphy uncovered a tomb, a library, works of art. The Sultan would gladly provide diggers. They were a sturdy enough people; they could make quite a showing in a week, if they were able to put aside their superstitions, fears and dreads. Murphy sized one of them up from the comer of his eye. He sat on a sunny slab of rock, and if he felt uneasy he concealed it quite successfully. In fact, thought Murphy, he appeared completely relaxed. Maybe the problem of securing diggers was a minor one after all... And here was an odd sidelight on the Singhalusi character. Once clear of the valley the man openly wore his shirt, a fine loose garment of electric blue, in defiance of the Sultan's edict. Of course out here he might be cold... Murphy felt his own skin crawling. How could he be cold? How could he be alive? Where was his space-suit? He lounged on the rock, grinning sardonically at Murphy. He wore heavy sandals, a black turban, loose breeches, the blue shirt. Nothing more. Where were the others? Murphy turned a feverish glance over his shoulder. A good three miles distant, bounding and leaping toward Singhalut, were twenty desperate figures. They all wore space-suits. This man here... A sjambak? A wizard? A hallucination? feet, strode springily toward Murphy. He carried a crossbow and a sword, like those of Murphy's fleet-footed guards. But he wore no space-suit. Could there be breathy able traces of an atmosphere? Murphy glanced at his gauge. Outside pressure: zero. Two other men appeared, moving with long elastic steps. Their eyes were bright, their faces flushed. They came up to Murphy, took his arm. They were solid, corporeal. They had no invisible force fields around their heads. Murphy jerked his arm free. "Let go of me, damn it!" But they certainly couldn't hear him through the vacuum. He glanced over his shoulder. The first man held his naked blade a foot or two behind Murphy's bulging space-suit. Murphy made no further resistance. He punched the button on his camera to automatic. It would now run for several hours, recording one hundred pictures per second, a thousand to the inch. The sjambaks led Murphy two hundred yards to a metal door. They opened it, pushed Murphy inside, banged it shut. Murphy felt the vibration through his shoes, heard a gradually waxing hum. His gauge showed an outside pressure of #, #, #, #, #. An inner door opened. Hands pulled Murphy in, undamped his dome. "Just what's going on here?" demanded Murphy angrily. Prince Ali-Tomas pointed to a table. Murphy saw a flashlight battery, aluminum foil, wire, a transistor kit, metal tubing, tools, a few other odds and ends. "There it is," said Prince AliTomas. "Get to work. Let's see one of these paralysis weapons you boast of." "Just like that, eh?" "Just like that." "What do you want 'em for?" "Does it matter?" "I'd like to know." Murphy was conscious of his camera, recording sight, sound, odor. "I lead an army," said Ali-Tomas, "but they march without weapons. Give me weapons! I will carry the word to Hadra, to New Batavia, to Sundaman, to BoengBohdt!" "How? Why?" "It is enough that I will it. Again, I beg of you..." He indicated the table. Murphy laughed. "I've got myself in a fine mess. Suppose I don't make this weapon for you?" "You'll remain until you do, under increasingly difficult conditions." "I'll be here a long time." "If such is the case," said AliTomas, "we must make our arrangements for your care on a longterm basis." Ali made a gesture. Hands seized Murphy's shoulders. A respirator was held to his nostrils. He thought of his camera, and he could have laughed. Mystery! Excitement! Thrills! Dramatic sequence for Know Your Universe! Staff-man murdered by fanatics! The crime recorded on his own camera! See the blood, hear his death-rattle, smell the poison! The vapor choked him. What a break! What a sequence! Frayberg, "bigger and brighter every minute." "It must've been just about in here," said Gatlin, "that Wilbur's horseback rider appeared." "That's right! Steward!" "Yes, sir?" "We're about twenty thousand miles out, aren't we?" "About fifteen thousand, sir." "Sidereal Cavalry! What an idea! I wonder how Wilbur's making out on his superstition angle?" Sam Gatlin, watching out the window, said in a tight voice, "Why not ask him yourself?" "Eh?" "Ask him for yourself! There he is -- outside, riding some kind of critter..." "It's a ghost," whispered Frayberg. "A man without a spacesuit... There's no such thing!" "He sees us... Look. , ." Murphy was staring at them, and his surprise seemed equal to their own. He waved his hand. Gatlin gingerly waved back. Said Frayberg, "That's not a horse he's riding. It's a combination ram-jet and kiddie car with stirrups!" "He's coming aboard the ship," said Gatlin. "That's the entrance port down there... captain's stateroom, taking careful breaths of air. "How are you now?" asked Frayberg. "Fine. A little sore in the lungs." "I shouldn't wonder," the ship's doctor growled. "I never saw anything like it." "How does it feel out there, Wilbur?" Gatlin asked. "It feels awful lonesome and empty. And the breath seeping up out of your lungs, never going in -- that's a funny feeling. And you miss the air blowing on your skin. I never realized it before. Air feels like -- like silk, like whipped cream -- it's got texture..." "But aren't you cold? Space is supposed to be absolute zero!" "Space is nothing. It's not hot and it's not cold. When you're in the sunlight you get warm. It's better in the shade. You don't lose any heat by air convection, but radiation and sweat evaporation keep you comfortably cool." "I still can't understand it," said Frayberg. "This Prince Ali, he's a kind of a rebel, eh?" "I don't blame him in a way. A normal man living under those domes has to let off steam somehow. Prince Ali decided to go out crusading. I think he would have made it too -- at least on Girgames." "Certainly there are many more men inside the domes..." "When it comes to fighting," said Murphy, "a sjambak can lick twenty men in spacesuits. A little nick doesn't hurt him, but a little nick bursts open a spacesuit, and the man inside comes apart." "Well," said the Captain. "I imagine the Peace Office will send out a team to put things in order now." Gatlin asked, "What happened when you woke up from the chloroform?" "Well, nothing very miKh. I felt this attachment on my chest, but didn't think much about it. Still kinda woozy. I was halfway through decompression. They keep a man there eight hours, drop pressure on him two pounds an hour, nice and slow so he don't get the bends." "Was this the same place they took you, when you met Ali?" "Yeah, that was their decompression chamber. They had to make a sjambak out of me; there wasn't anywhere else they could keep me. Well, pretty soon my head cleared, and I saw this apparatus stuck to my chest." He poked at the mechanism on the table. "I saw the oxygen tank, I saw the blood running dirough the plastic pipes -- blue from me to that carburetor arrangement, red on the way back in -- and I figured out the whole arrangement. Carbon dioxide still exhales up through your lungs, but the vein back to the left auricle is routed through the carburetor and supercharged with oxygen. A man doesn't need to breathe. The carburetor flushes his blood with oxygen, the decompression tank adjusts him to the lack of air-pressure. There's only one thing to look out for; that's not to touch anything with your naked flesh. If it's in the sunshine it's blazing hot; if it's in the shade it's cold enough to cut. Otherwise you're free as a bird." "But -- how did you get away?" "I saw those little rocket-bikes, and began figuring. I couldn't go back to Singhalut; I'd be lynched on sight as a sjambak. I couldn't fly to another planet -- the bikes don't carry enough fuel. "I knew when the ship would be coming in, so I figured I'd fly up to meet it. I told the guard I was going outside a minute, and I got on one of the rocket-bikes. There was nothing much to it." "Well," said Frayberg, "it's a great feature, Wilbur -- a great film! Maybe we can stretch it into two hours." "There's one thing bothering me," said Gatlin. "Who did the steward see up here the first time?" Murphy shrugged. "It might have been somebody up here skylarking. A little too much oxygen and you start cutting all kinds of capers. Or it might have been someone who decided he had enough crusading. "There's a sjambak in a cage, right in the middle of Singhalut. Prince Ali walks past; they look at each other eye to eye. Ali smiles a little and walks on. Suppose this sjambak tried to escape to the ship. He's taken aboard, turned over to the Sultan and the Sultan makes an example of him..." "What'll the Sultan do to Ali?" Murphy shook his head. "If I were Ali I'd disappear." A loudspeaker turned on. "Attention all passengers. We have just passed through quarantine. Passengers may now disembark. Important: no weapons or explosives allowed on Singhalut!" "This is where I came in," said Murphy. There's no such thing as a weapon too horrible to use; weapons will continue to become bigger, and deadlier. Like other things that can't be stopped... By H. B. Fyfe dome of the colossal command ship just beyond Pluto, every nervous clearing of a throat rasped through the silence. Telescopes were available but most of the scientists and high officials preferred the view on the huge telescreen. This showed, from a distance of small moons of the frigid planet, so insignificant that it had not been discovered until man had pushed the boundaries of space exploration past the asteroids. The satellite was about to become spectacularly significant, however, as the first target of man's newest, most destructive weapon. "I need not remind you, gentlemen," white-haired Co-ordinator Evora of Mars had said, "that if we have actually succeeded in this race against our former Centaurian colonies, it may well prevent the imminent conflict entirely. In a few moments we shall know whether our scientists have developed a truly irresistible weapon." Of all the officials, soldiers, and scientists present, Arnold Gibson was perhaps the least excited. For one thing, he had labored hard to make the new horror succeed and felt reasonably confident that it would. The project had been given the attention of every first class scientific mind in the Solar System ; for the great fear was that the new states on the Centaurian planets might win the race of discovery and... And bring a little order into this old-fashioned, inefficient fumbling toward progress, Gibson thought contemptuously. Look at them -- fools for all their degrees and titles! They've stumbled on something with possibilities beyond their confused powers of application. A gasp rustled through the chamber, followed by an even more awed silence than had preceded the unbelievable, ultra-rapid action on the telescreen. Gibson permitted himself a tight smile of satisfaction. Now my work really begins, he reflected. A few quick steps brought him to Dr. Haas, director of the project, just before the less stunned observers surrounded that gentleman, babbling questions. "I'll start collecting the Number Three string of recorders," he reported. "All right, Arnold," agreed Haas. "Tell the others to get their ships out too. I'll be busy here." Not half as busy as you will be in about a day, thought Gibson, heading for the spaceship berths. signed the recording machines drifting in space at the greatest distance from the command ship. The others would assume that he needed more time to locate and retrieve the apparatus -- which would give him a head start toward Alpha Centauri. His ship was not large, but it was powerful and versatile to cope with any emergency that may have been encountered during the dangerous tests. Gibson watched his instruments carefully for signs of pursuit miles between himself and the command ship. Then he eased his craft into subspace drive and relaxed his vigilance. He returned to normal space many "days" later in the vicinity of Alpha Centauri. They may have attempted to follow him for all he knew, but it hardly mattered by then. He broadcast the recognition signal he had been given to memorize long ago, when he had volunteered his services to the new states. Then he headed for the capital planet, Nessus. Long before reaching it, he acquired a lowering escort of warcraft, but he was permitted to land. "Well, well, it's young Gibson!" the Chairman of Nessus greeted him, after the newcomer had passed through the exhaustive screening designed to protect the elaborate underground headquarters. "I trust you have news for us, my boy. Watch outside the door, Colonel!" One of the ostentatiously armed guards stepped outside and closed the door as Gibson greeted the obese man sitting across the buttonstudded expanse of desk. The scientist was under no illusion as to the vagueness of the title "Chairman." He was facing the absolute power of the Centaurian planets -- which, in a few months' time, would be the same as saying the ruler of all the human race in both systems. Gibson's file must have been available on the Chairman's desk telescreen within minutes of the reception of his recognition signal. He felt a thrill of admiration for the efficiency of the new states and their system of government. He made it his business to report briefly and accurately, trusting that the plain facts of his feat would attract suitable recognition. They did. Chairman Diamond's sharp blue eyes glinted out of the fat mask of his features. "Well done, my boy!" he grunted, with a joviality he did not bother trying to make sound overly sincere. "So they have it! You must see our men immediately, and point out where they have gone wrong. You may leave it to me to decide who has gone wrong!" voluntarily before reminding himself that he had seen the correct answer proved before his eyes. He had stood there and watched -- more, he had worked with them all his adult life -- and he was the last whom the muddled fools would have suspected. The officer outside the door, Colonel Korman, was recalled and given orders to escort Gibson to the secret state laboratories. He glanced briefly at the scientist when they had been let out through the complicated system of safeguards. "We have to go to the second moon," he said expressionlessly. "Better sleep all you can on the way. Once you're there, the Chairman will be impatient for results!" Gibson was glad, after they had landed on the satellite, that he had taken the advice. He was led from one underground lab to another, to compare Centaurian developments with Solarian. Finally, Colonel Korman appeared to extricate him, giving curt answers to such researchers as still had questions. "Whew! Glad you got me out!" Gibson thanked him. "They've been picking my brain for two days straight!" "I hope you can stay awake," retorted Korman with no outward sign of sympathy. "If you think you can't, say so now. I'll have them give you another shot. The Chairman is calling on the telescreen." Gibson straightened. Jealous snob! he thought. Typical military fathead, and he knows I amount to more than any little colonel now. I was smart enough to fool all the so-called brains of the Solar System. "I'll stay awake," he said shortly. Chairman Diamond's shiny features appeared on the screen soon after Korman reported his charge ready. "Speak freely," he ordered Gibson. "This beam is so tight and scrambled that no prying jackass could even tell that it is communication. Have you set us straight?" "Yes, Your Excellency," replied Gibson. "I merely pointed out which of several methods the Solarians got to yield results. Your -- our scientists were working on all possibilities, so it would have been only a matter of time." "Which you have saved us," said Chairman Diamond. His ice-blue eyes glinted again. "I wish I could have seen the faces of Haas and Coordinator Evora, and the rest. You fooled them completely!" Gibson glowed at the rare praise. "I dislike bragging. Your Excellency," he said, "but they are fools. I might very well have found the answer without them, once they had collected the data. My success shows what intelligence, well-directed after the manner of the new states of Centauri, can accomplish against inefficiency." The Chairman's expression, masked by the fat of his face, nevertheless approached a smile. "So you would say that you -- one of our sympathizers -- were actually the most intelligent worker they had?" He'll have his little joke, thought Gibson, and I'll let him put it over. Then, even that sour colonel will laugh with us, and the Chairman will hint about what post I'll get as a reward. I wouldn't mind being in charge -- old Haas' opposite number at this end. "I think I might indeed be permitted to boast of that much ability. Your Excellency," he answered, putting on what he hoped was an expectant smile. "Although, considering the Solarians, that is not saying much." The little joke did not develop precisely as anticipated. "Unfortunately," Chairman Diamond said, maintaining his smile throughout, "wisdom should never be confused with intelligence." G ibson waited, feeling his own smile stiffen as he wondered what could be going wrong. Surely, they could not doubt his loyalty! A hasty glance at Colonel Korman revealed no expression on the military facade affected by that gentleman. "For if wisdom were completely synonymous with intelligence," the obese Chairman continued, relishing his exposition, "you would be a rival to myself, and consequently would be -- disposed of -- anyway!" Such a tingle shot up Gibson's spine that he was sure he must have jumped. "Anyway?" he repeated huskily. His mouth suddenly seemed dry. Chairman Diamond smiled out of the telescreen, so broadly that Gibson was unpleasantly affected by the sight of his small, gleaming, white teeth. "Put it this way," he suggested suavely. "Your highly trained mind observed, correlated, and memorized the most iiitricate data and mathematics, meanwhile guiding your social relations with your former colleagues so as to remain unsuspected while stealing their most cherished secret. Such a feat demonstrates ability and intelligence." Gibson tried to lick his lips, and could not, despite the seeming fairness of the words. He sensed a pulsing undercurrent of cruelty and cynicism. "On the other hand," the mellow voice flowed on, "having received the information, being able to u.se it effectively now without you, and knowing that you betrayed once -- I shall simply discard you like an old message blank. That is an act of wisdom. "Had you chosen your course more wisely," he added, "your position might be stronger." By the time Arnold Gibson regained his voice, the Centaurian autocrat was already giving instructions to Colonel Korman. The scientist strove to interrupt, to attract the ruler's attention even momentarily. Neither paid him any heed, until he shouted and tried frenziedly to shove the soldier from in front of the telescreen. Korman backhanded him across the throat without looking around, with such force that Gibson staggered back and fell. He lay, half-choking, grasping his throat with both hands until he could breathe. The colonel continued discussing his extinction without emotion. "... so if Your Excellency agrees, I would prefer taking him back to Nessus first, for the sake of the morale factor here. Some of them are so addled now at having been caught chasing up wrong alleys that they can hardly work." Apparently the Chairman agreed, for the screen was blank when the colonel reached down and hauled Gibson to his feet. "Now, listen to me carefully!" he said, emphasizing his order with a ringing slap across Gibson's face. "I shall walk behind you with my blaster drawn. If you make a false move, I shall not kill you." Gibson stared at him, holding his bleeding mouth. "It will be much worse," Korman went on woodenly. "Imagine what it will be like to have both feet charred to the bone. You would have to crawl the rest of the way to the ship; I certainly would not consider carrying you!" In a nightmarish daze, Gibson obeyed the cold directions, and walked slowly along the underground corridors of the Centaurian research laboratories. He prayed desperately that someone -- anyone -- might come along. Anybody who could possibly be used to create a diversion, or to be pushed into Korman and his deadly blaster. The halls remained deserted, possibly by arrangement. Maybe I'd better wait till we reach his ship, Gibson thought. I ought to he able to figure a way before we reach Nessus. I had the brains to fool Haas and... He winced, recalling Chairman Diamond's theory of the difference between intelligence and wisdom. The obscene swine! he screamed silently. Colonel Korman grunted warningly, and Gibson took the indicated turn. They entered the spaceship from an underground chamber, and Gibson learned the reason for his executioner's assurance when the latter chained him to one of the pneumatic acceleration seats. The chain was fragile in appearance, but he knew he would not be free to move until Korman so desired. More of their insane brand of cleverness! he reflected. That's the sort of thing they do succeed in thinking of. They're all crazy! Why did I ever... But he shrank from the question he feared to answer. To drag out into the open his petty, selfish reasons, shorn of the tinsel glamor of so-called "service" and "progress," would be too painful. A fter the first series of accelerations, he roused himself from his beaten stupor enough to note that Korman was taking a strange course for reaching Nessus. Then, entirely too close to 'the planet and its satellites to ensure (Continued on page #) A grim tale of a future in which everyone is desperate to escape reality, and a hero who wants to have his wine and drink it, too. OU Wine By Richard O. Lewis self more comfortably in his easy chair, extended his short legs further toward the fireplace, and let his eyes travel cautiously in the general direction of his wife. She was in her chair as usual, her long legs curled up beneath her, the upper half of her face hidden in the bulk of her personalized, three-dimensional telovis. The telovis, of a stereoscopic nature, seemingly brought the performers with all their tinsel and color directly into the room of the watcher. Hyrel had no way of seeing into the plastic affair she wore, but he guessed from the expression on the lower half of her face that she was watching one of the newer blackmarket sex-operas. In any event, there would be no sound, movement, or sign of life from her for the next three hours. To break the thread of the play for even a moment would ruin all the previous emotional build-up. There had been a time when he hated her for those long and silent evenings, lonely hours during which he was completely ignored. It was different now, however, for those hours furnished him with time for an escape of his own. His lips curled into a tight smile and his right hand fondled the unobtrusive switch beneath his trouser leg. He did not press the switch. He would wait a few minutes longer. But it was comforting to know that it was there, exhilarating to know that he could escape for a few hours by a mere flick of his finger. He let his eyes stray to the dim light of the artificial flames in the fireplace. His hate for her was not bounded merely by those lonely hours she had forced upon him. No, it was far more encompassing. He hated her with a deep, burning savagery that was deadly in its passion. He hated her for her money, the money she kept securely from him. He hated her for the paltry allowance she doled out to him, as if he were an irresponsible child. It was as if she were constantly reminding him in every glance and gesture, "I made a bad bargain when I married you. You wanted me, my money, everything, and had nothing to give in return except your own doltish self. You set a trap for me, baited with lies and a false front. Now you are caught in your own trap and will remain there like a mouse to eat from my hand whatever crumbs I stoop to give you." But some day his hate would be appeased. Yes, some day soon he would kill her! He shot a sideways glance at her, wondering if by chance she suspected... She hadn't moved. Her lips were pouted into a half smile; the sex-opera had probably reached one of its more pleasurable moments. Hyrel let his eyes shift back to the fireplace again. Yes, he would kill her. Then he would claim a rightful share of her money, be rid of her debasing dominance. H e let the thought run around through his head, savoring it with mental taste buds. He would not kill her tonight. No, nor the next night. He would wait, wait until he had sucked the last measure of pleasure from the thought. It was like having a bottle of rare old wine on a shelf where it could be viewed daily. It was like being able to pause again and again before the bottle, hold it up to the light, and say to it, "Some day, when my desire for you has reached the ultimate, I shall unstopper you quietly and sip you slowly to the last soul-satisfying drop." As long as the bottle remained there upon the shelf it was symbolic of that pleasurable moment... He snapped out of his reverie and realized he had been wasting precious moments. There would be time enough tomorrow for gloating. Tonight, there were other things to do. Pleasurable things. He remembered the girl he had met the night before, and smiled smugly. Perhaps she would be awaiting him eVen now. If not, there would be another one... He settled himself deeper into the chair, glanced once more at his wife, then let his head lean comfortably back against the chair's headrest. His hand upon his thigh felt the thin mesh that cloaked his body beneath his clothing like a sheer stocking. His fingers went again to the tiny switch. Again he hesitated. Herbert Hyrel knew no more about the telporter suit he wore than he did about the radio in the corner, the TV set against the wall, or the personalized telovis his wife was wearing. You pressed one of the buttons on the radio; music came out. You pressed a button and clicked a dial on the TV ; music and pictures came out. You pressed a button and made an adjustment on the telovis; three diitiensional, emotion-colored pictures leaped into the room. You pressed a tiny switch on the telporter suit ; you were whisked away to a receiving set you had previously set up in secret. He knew that the music and the Images of the performers on the Tv and telovis were brought to his room by some form of electrical impulse or wave while the actual musicians and performers remained in the studio. He knew that when he pressed the switch on his thigh something within him -- his ectoplasm, higher self, the thing spirits use for materialization, whatever its real name -- streamed out of him along an invisible channel, leaving his body behind in the chair in a conscious but dream-like state. His other self materialized in a small cabin in a hidden nook between a highway and a river where he had installed the receiving set a month ago. He thought once more of the girl who might be waiting for him, smiled, and pressed the switch. was chill to Herbert Hyrel's naked flesh. He fumbled through the darkness for the clothing he kept there, found his shorts and trousers, got hurriedly into them, then flicked on a pocket lighter and ignited a stub of candle upon the table. By the wavering light, he finished dressing in the black satin clothing, the white shirt, the flowing necktie and tarn. He invoiced the contents of his billfold. Not much. And his monthly pittance was still two weeks away... He had skimped for six months to salvage enough money from his allowance to make a down payment on the telporter suit. Since then, his expenses -- monthly payments for the suit, cabin rent, costly liquor -- had forced him to place his nights of escape on strict ration. He could not go on this way, he realized. Not now. Not since he had met the girl. He had to have more money. Perhaps he could not afford the luxury of leaving the wine bottle longer upon the shelf... Riverside Club, where Hyrel arrived by bus and a hundred yards of walking, was exclusive. It catered to a clientele that had but three things in common: money, a desire for utter self-abandonment, and a sales slip indicating ownership of a telporter suit. The club was of necessity expensive, for selftelportation was strictly illegal, and police protection came high. Herbert Hyrel adjusted his white, silken mask carefully at the door and shoved his sales slip through a small aperture where it was thoroughly scanned by unseen eyes. A buzzer sounded an instant later, the lock on the door clicked, and Hyrel pushed through into the exhilarating warmth of music and laughter. The main room was large. Hidden lights along the walls sent slow green, yellow and pink trailing across the domed ceiling in a heterogeneous pattern. The colored beams mingled, diffused, spread, were caught up by mirrors of various tints which diffused and mingled the lights once more until the whole effect was an ever-changing panorama of softly-melting shades. The gay and bizarre costumes of the masked revelers on the dance floor and at the tables, unearthly in themselves, were made even more so by the altering light. Music flooded the room from unseen sources. Laughter -- hysterical, drunken, filled with utter abandonment -- came from the dance floor, the tables, and the private booths and rooms hidden cleverly within the walls. Hyrel pushed himself to an unoccupied table, sat down and ordered a bottle of cheap whiskey. He would have preferred champagne, but his depleted finances forbade the more discriminate taste. When his order arrived, he poured a glass tumbler half full and consumed it eagerly while his eyes scanned the room in search of the girl. He couldn't see her in the dim swirl of color. Had she arrived? Perhaps she was wearing a different costume than shs had the night before. If so, recognition might prove difficult. ' He poured himself another drink, promising himself he would go in search of her when the liquor began to take effect. A woman clad in the revealing garb of a Persian dancer threw an arm about him from behind and kissed him on the cheek through the veil which covered the lower part of her face. "Hi, honey," she giggled into his ear. "Havin' a time?" He reached for the white arm to pull her to him, but she eluded his grasp and reeled away into the waiting arms of a tall toreador. Hyrel gulped his whiskey and watched her nestle into the arms of her partner and begin with him a sinuous, suggestive dance. The whiskey had begun its warming effect, and he laughed. This was the land of the lotus eaters, the sanctuary of the escapists, the haven of all who wished to cast off their shell of inhibition and become the thing they dreamed themselves to be. Here one could be among his own kind, an actor upon a gay stage, a gaudy butterfly metamorphosed from the slug, a knight of old. The Persian dancing girl was probably the wife of a boorish oaf whose idea of romance was spending an evening telling his wife how he came to be a successful bank president. But she had found her means of escape. Perhaps she had pleaded a sick headache and had retired to her room. And there upon the bed now reposed her shell of reality while her inner self, the shadowy one, completely materialized, became an exotic thing from the East in this never-never land. The man, the toreador, had probably closeted himself within his library with a set of account books and had left strict orders not to be disturbed until he had finished with them. Both would have terrific hangovers in the morning. But that, of course, would be fully compensated for by the memories of the evening. Plyrel chuckled. The situation struck him as being funny: the shadowy self got drunk and had a good time, and the outer husk suffered the hangover in the morning. Strange. Strange how a device such as the telporter suit could cause the shadow of each bodily cell to leave the body, materialize, and become a reality in its own right. And yet... left hand. There was a long, irregular scar there. It was the result of a cut he had received nearly three weeks ago when he had fallen over this very table and had rammed his hand into a sliver of broken champagne glass. Later that evening, upon re-telporting back home, the pain of the cut had remained in his hand, but there was no sign of the cut itself on the hand of his outer self. The scar was peculiar to the shadowy body only. There was something about the shadowy body that carried the hurts to the outer body, but not the scars... Sudden laughter broke out near him, and he turned quickly in that direction. A group of gaily costumed revelers was standing in a semi-circle about a small mound of clothing upon the floor. It was the costume of the toreador. Hyrel laughed, too. It had happened many times before -- a costume suddenly left empty as its owner, due to a threat of discovery at home, had had to press the switch in haste to bring his shadowy self -- and complete consciousness -- back to his outer self in a hurry. A waiter picked up the clothing. He would put it safely away so that the owner could claim it upon his next visit to the club. Another waiter placed a fresh bottle of whiskey on the table before Hyrel, and Hyrel paid him for it. The whiskey, reaching his head now in surges of warm cheerfulment, courage, and a desire for merriment. He pushed himself up from the table, joined the merry throng, threw his arm about the Persian dancer, drew her close. They began dancing slowly to the throbbing rhythm, dancing and holding on to each other tightly. Hyrel could feel her hot breath through her veil upon his neck, adding to the headiness of the liquor. His feeling of depression and inferiority flowed suddenly from him. Once again he was the all-conquering male. His arm trembled as it drew her still closer to him and he began dancing directly and purposefully toward the shadows of a clump of artificial palms near one comer of the room. There was an exit to the garden behind the palms. Half way there they passed a secluded booth from which protruded a long leg clad in black mesh stocking. Hyrel paused as he recognized that part of the costume. It was she! The girl! The one he had met so briefly the night before! His arm slid away from the Persian dancer, took hold of the meshclad leg, and pulled. A female form followed the leg from the booth and fell into his arms. He held her tightly, kissed her white neck, let her perfume send his thoughts reeling. "Been looking for me, honey?" she whispered, her voice deep and throaty. "You know it!" He began whisking her away toward the palms. The Persian girl was pulled into the booth. Yes, she was wearing the same costume she had worn the night before, that of a can-can dancer of the #'s. The mesh hose that encased her shapely legs were held up by flowered supporters in such a manner as to leave four inches of white leg exposed between hose top and lacy panties. Her skirt, frilled to suggest innumerable petticoats, fell away at each hip, leaving the front open to expose the full length of legs. She wore a wig of platinum hair encrusted with jewels that sparkled in the lights. Her jewelstudded mask was as white as her hair and covered the upper half of her face, except for the large almond slits for her eyes. A white purse, jewel crusted, dangled from one arm. He stopped once before reaching the palms, drew her closer, kissed her long and ardently. Then he began pulling her on again. She drew back when they reached the shelter of the fronds. "Champagne, first," she whispered huskily into his ear. His heart sank. He had very little money left. Well, it might buy a cheap brand... slowly and provocatively across the table from him. Her eyes sparkled behind the almond slits of her mask, caught the color changes and cast them back. She was wearing contact lenses of a garish green. He wished she would hurry with her drink. He had horrible visions of his wife at home taking off her telovis and coming to his chair. He would then have to press the switch that would jerk his shadowy self back along its invisible connecting cord, jerk him back and leave but a small mound of clothes upon the chair at the table. Deep depression laid hold of him. He would not be able to see her after tonight until he received his monthly dole two weeks hence. She wouldn't wait that long. Someone else would have her. Unless... Yes, he knew now that he was going to kill his wife as soon as the opportunity presented itself. It would be a simple matter. With the aid of the telporter suit, he could establish an iron-clad alibi. He took a long drink of whiskey and looked at the dancers about him. Sight of their gay costumes heightened his depression. He was wearing a cheap suit of satin, all he could afford. But some day soon he would show them! Some time soon he would be dressed as gaily... "Something troubling you, honey?" His gaze shot back to her and she blurred slightly before his eyes. "No. Nothing at all!" He summoned a sickly smile and clutched her hand in his. "Come on. Let's dance." He drew her from the chair and into his arms. She melted toward him as if desiring to become a part of him. A tremor of excitement surged through him and threatened to turn his knees into quivering jelly. He could not make his feet conform to the flooding rhythm of the music. He half stumbled, half pushed her along past the booths. In the shelter of the palms he drew her savagely to him. "Let's -- let's go outside." His voice was little more than a croak. "But, honey!" She pushed herself away, her low voice maddening him. "Don't you have a private room? A girl doesn't like to be taken outside..." Her words bit into his brain like the blade of a hot knife. No, he didn't have a private room at the club like the others. A private room for his telporter receiver, a private room where he couldn't afford it! No! No! NO! His lot was a cheap suit of satin! Cheap whiskey! Cheap champagne! A cheap shack by the river... An inarticulate cry escaped his twisted lips. He clutched her roughly to him and dragged her through the door and into the moonlight, whiskey and anger lending him brutal strength. He pulled her through the deserted garden. All the others had private rooms! He pulled her to the far end, behind a clump of squatty firs. His hands clawed at her. He tried to smother her mouth with kisses. She eluded him deftly. "But, honey!" Her voice had gone deeper into her throat. "I just want to be sure about things. If you can't afford one of the private rooms -- if you can't afford to show me a good time -- if you can't come here real often... The whiskey pounded and throbbed at his brain like blows from an unseen club. His ego curled and twisted within him like a headless serpent. "I'll have money!" he shouted, struggling to hold her. "I'll have plenty of money! After tonight!" "Then we'll wait," she said. "We'll wait until tomorrow night." "No!" he screamed. "You don't believe me! You're like the others! You think I'm no good! But I'll show you! I'll show all of you!" his arms, unyielding. Madness added to the pounding in his brain. Tears welled into his eyes. "I'll show you! I'll kill her! Then I'll have money!" The hands clutching her shoulders shook her drunkenly. "You wait here! I'll go home and kill her now! Then I'll be back!" "Silly boy!" Her low laughter rang hollowly in his ears. "And just who is it you are going to kill?" "My wife!" he cried. "My wife! I'll..." A sudden sobering thought struck him. He was talking too much. And he wasn't making sense. He shouldn't be telling her this. Anyway, he couldn't get the money tonight even if he did kill his wife. "And so you are going to kill your wife... He blinked the tears from his eyes. His chest was heaving, his heart pounding. He looked at her shimmering form. "Y-yes," he whispered. Her eyes glinted strangely in the light of the moon. Her handbag glinted as she opened it, and something she took from it glittered coldly in her hand. "Fool!" The first shot tore squarely through his heart. And while he stood staring at her, mouth agape, a second shot burned its way through his bewildered brain. moved the telovis from her head and laid it carefully aside. She uncoiled her long legs from beneath her, walked to her husband's chair, and stood for a long moment looking down at him, her lips drawn back in contempt. Then she bent over him and reached down his thigh until her fingers contacted the small switch. Seconds later, a slight tremor sjiook Hyrel's body. His eyes snapped open, air escaped his lungs. his lower jaw sagged inanely, and his head lolled to one side. She stood a moment longer, watching his eyes become glazed and sightless. Then she walked to the telephone. "Police?" she said. "This is Mrs. Herbert Hyrel. Something horrible has happened to my husband. Please come over immediately. Bring a doctor." She hung up, went to her bathroom, stripped off her clothing, and slid carefully out of her telporter suit. This she folded neatly and tucked away into the false back of the medicine cabinet. She found a fresh pair of blue, plastifur pajamas and got into them. She was just arriving back into the living room, tying the cord of her dressing gown about her slim waist, when she heard the sound of the police siren out front. of fine science fiction being published these days, we guarantee that best five short novels of #. An outstandingly complete and convincing examination of an alien planet and its civilization ; a compelling portrait of a highly unusual, and unusually human, hero; a suspenseful development of a complex problem which will leave you with plenty to ponder and argue -- this is the stuff of which classics are made, and it's coming in the September issue (on sale July #). IF is proud of this story; you won't want to miss it! Sound the fanfare! Beat the drums! Shout hosannas! Here he comes ,... By James McKimmey, Jr. The city stretched. Empty The city yawned, streets glistened from the bath of Rows of houses lay like square a water truck. Dew-wet grass ivory beads on patches of green winked at the fresh peeping sun, felt. A boy drove his bicycle down enue, whistling loudly, while tightly rolled newspapers arced from his hand and slapped against porches, Lights snapped on in a thousand windows, shining yellowly against the cool whiteness of dawn. Men blinked and touched beard-stubbled chins. Women moved sleepily toward porcelain and chrome kitchens. A truck roared and garbage pails rattled. There was a smell of sour orange rinds and wet leaves and unfolding flowers. Over this came the smell of toasting bread and frying bacon. Doors swung open, slippered feet padded across porches and hands groped for the rolled newspapers. The air was stricken with the blaring sound of transcribed music and the excited voices of commercial announcers. The doors swung shut and the sounds were muted. stretched and scratched. The sun rose above the horizon. Celebrity day. D oors slammed again, and half-consumed cups of coffee lay cooling behind. Children wiped at sleepy eyes and mothers swept crumbs, touching self-conscious fingers at their own bed-ruffled hair. Laborers and clerks and lawyers and doctors strode down sidewalks and climbed into automobiles and busses and sleek-nosed elevated trains. The city moved. To the center of the city, where the tall buildings stretched to the lighting sky, came the horde, like thousands of ants toward a comb of honey. Wheels sang and whined. Horns blasted. Whistles blew. And waiting, strung above the wide streets between the cold marquees and the dead neon tubes, were the banners and the flags and the bunting. The air warmed and the sun brightened. Voices chattered. Elbows nudged. Mouths smiled, teeth shone, and there was the sound of laughter, rising over the pushing throngs. The city was happy. The bunting dipped and the banners fluttered and the flags whipped. At the edge of the city, the airport tightened itself. Waiting, waiting for the silver and blue rocket. The rocket of the Celebrity. A large hotel, towering above the pulsing streets, began the quiver of activity. As though a great electric current had been run through its cubes and shafts and hollows, the hotel crackled. Desk clerks clicked bells and bell boys hopped. Elevators rose and fell. In the cellar, wine bottles were dusted by quick, nervous hands. In the kitchen, a towering cake was frosted and decorated. Orders cracked. Hands flew and feet chattered against tile. In one rich expansive suite a giant hoop of multi-colored flowers was placed in the center of a room. It was in the air. Laughter, awe, worship, excitement! Ropes went up and stretched between lamp posts. Blue-coated men on horses began blocking streets. Old women with wooden boxes, children with flashing eyes, men in rich suits and tattered suits began Curbs became lined with people. Bars threw open doors and fresh air met stale air. Men with fat faces, thin faces, white faces, red faces, twitching with the anticipation of holiday freedom, gulped jiggers of raw whiskey and shuddered happily. Children giggled and yelled and sprinted in crazy zig-zags. Men in white caps hustled in front of the lined curbs, shouting, carrying their boxes of ice-cream. Men with buttons, men with pennants, men with balloons joined the shouting, and the sound rose in the air and the city smiled and shifted and its heart pounded. The hotel whirred inside itself. The airport tensed and searched the sky. ing throngs jammed the sidewalks, raising their strengthening sound between the tall buildings. Windows popped open and faces beamed. Tentative showers of confetti drifted down through the air. The city waited, its pulse thumping. The rocket was a black point in the sky. It grew. White-suited men scattered over the landing strip. Photographers crouched. Bulbs snapped into reflectors. Cameras pointed. The rocket landed. A door snapped open. Blue uniforms converged and flash bulbs popped. There were shouts and orders and men running. Gates swung and there was a blue-rimmed movement to a black open car. Sirens moaned, screamed. And the black car was moving swiftly into the city. Beneath the buildings, marching bands in red and blue and yellow uniforms stood assembled. Girls in short skirts and tassled hats spun silver batons into the warm air. Bare legs kicked. Black boots flashed. The crowd swayed against the ropes, and there was laughter and sweating and squinting. The black car reached the heart of the city. Sirens died. Rows of men snapped to attention. Policemen aligned their motorcycles. A baton shimmered high against the sun and came down. A cymbal crashed. Drums cracked. Music blared. And there was a movement down the street. The black car rolled along, while tape swept down from the buildings in long swirling ribbons. There was a snow of confetti. And from the throats of the people came the first roar. It grew, building, building in volume, and the city thundered its welcome to the man sitting upon the back of the open car, the small man who tipped his hat and smiled and blinked behind his glasses: Joseph S. Stettison, B.A., B.S., M.S., M.D., Ph.D., L.M. (Hon.), F.R.C.O.G. C.I.B. Agent Pell used his head, even if he did rely on hunches more than on the computer. In fact, when the game got rough, he found that to use his head, he first had to keep it , Brink of By Walt Sheldon T he night the visitors came Richard Pell worked late among the great banks of criminological computers. He whistled to himself, knowing that he was way off key but not caring. Ciel, his wife, was still in his mind's eye; he'd seen her on the viewer and talked with her not ten minutes ago. "Be home shortly, baby," he'd said, "soon as I fill in a form or two." "All right, dear. I'll wait," she'd answered, with just the slightest tone of doubt. It was an important night. It was at once their second anniversary and the beginning of their second honeymoon. Just how Pell -- knobby, more or less homely, and easygoing -- had won himself a lovely, long-limbed blonde like Ciel was something of a mystery to many of their friends. She could hardly have married him for his money. Central Investigation Bureau agents were lucky if all their extras and bonuses brought them up to a thousand credits a year. Pell had unquestionably caught her in a romantic moment. Maybe that was part of the trouble -- part of the reason they needed this second honeymoon, this period of reacquaintance so badly. Being the wife of a C.I.B. agent meant sitting at home nine-tenths of the time while he was working on a case, and then not hearing about the case for security reasons during the onetenth of the time he was with her. Four times now Pell had been ready to take his vacation; four times last minute business had come up. No more, though, by golly. Tonight he'd get out of here just as quickly as... The Identifier, beyond the door, began to hum. That meant somebody was putting his hand to the opaque screen, and if the scanner recognized the fingerprints the door would open. Pell scowled at the bulky shadows outside. "Go away, whoever you are," he muttered to himself. Some of the other agents were out there, no doubt; they were always getting sudden inspirations late at night and returning to use the computers again. In fact, it had been tactifully suggested to Agent Richard Pell that he might use the computers a little more himself instead of relying on hunches as he so often did. "Investigation's a cold science, not a fancy art," Chief Larkin was fond of saying to the group -- with his eyes on Pell. Well, whoever it was. Pell was definitely through. No time-wasting conversation for him! He was ready for six glorious weeks of saved-up vacation time. He and Ciel, early tomorrow, would grab a rocket for one of the Moon resorts, and there they'd just loaf and relax and pay attention to each other. Try to regain whatever it was they'd had... T he door opened and Chief Larkin walked in. Chief Eustace J. Larkin was tall, in his forties, bu still boyishly handsome. He dressed expensively and well. He was dynamic and confident and he always had about him just the faintest aroma of very expensive shaving cologne. He had a Master's degree in criminology and his rise to the post of Director, C.I.B., had been sudden, dramatic and impressive. Not the least of his talents was a keen sense of public relations. "I -- uh -- was on my way out," said Pell. He reached for his hat. Funny about hats: few people traveled topside anymore, and in the climate-conditioned tunnels you didn't need a hat. But C.I.B. agents had to be neat and dignified; regulations required hats and ties and cuffs and lapels. Thus, you could always spot a C.I.B. agent a mile away. Larkin had a dimple when he smiled and Pell would bet he knew it. "We'd have called your home if we hadn't found you here. Sit down, Dick." Pell sat glumly. For the first time, he noticed the men who had come in with the Chief. He recognized both. One was fiftyish, tall, solidly-built and well-dressed on the conservative side. His face was strong, square and oddly pale, as if someone had taken finest white marble and roughly hacked a face into it. Pell had seen that face in faxpapers often. The man was Theodor Rysland, once a wealthy corporation lawyer, now a World Government adviser in an unofficial way. Some admired him as a selfless public servant; others swore he was a power-mad tyrant. Few were indifferent. "I'm sure you recognize Mr. Rysland," said Chief Larkin, smiling. "And this is Dr. Walter Nebel, of the World Department of Education." Dr. Walter Nebel was slight and had a head remarkably tiny in proportion to the rest of him. He wore cropped hair. His eyes were turtlelidded and at first impression sleepy, and then, with a second look --  wary. Pell remembered that he had won fame some time ago by discovering the electrolytic enzyme in the thought process. Pell wasn't sure exactly what this was, but the faxpapers had certainly made a fuss about it at the time. He shook hands with the two men and then said to Larkin, "What's up?" "Patience," said Larkin and shuffled chairs into place. Rysland sat down solidly and gravely; Nebel perched. Rysland looked at Pell with a strong, level stare and said, "It's my sincere hope that this meeting tonight will prevent resumption of the war with Venus." Larkin said, "Amen." Pell stared back in some surprise. High-level stuff! Rysland saw his stare and chuckled. "Chief Larkin tells me your sympathies are more or less Universalist. Not that it would be necessary, but it helps." "Oh," said Pell, with mild bewilderment. The difference between the Universal and Defense parties was pretty clear-cut. The Universalists hoped to resume full relations with Venus and bring about a really secure peace through friendship and trade. It would admittedly be a tough struggle, and the Defenders didn't think it was possible. Forget Venus, said they; fortify Earth, keep the line of demarcation on Mars, and sit tight. "But there is, as you may know," said Rysland, "a third course in our relations with Venus." "There is?" asked Pell. From the corner of his eye he saw Chief Larkin looking at him with an expression of -- what, amusement? Yes, amusement, largely, but with a touch of contempt, too, perhaps. Hard to say. "The third course," said Rysland, not smiling, "would be to attack Venus again, resume the war, and hope to win quickly. We know Venus is exhausted from the recent struggle. A sudden, forceful attack might possibly subjugate her. At least, that is the argument of a certain group called the Supremists." Dr. Nebel spoke for the first time. Pell realized that the man had been watching him closely. His voice was sibilant ; it seemed to drag itself through wet grass. "Also Venus Is psychologically unprepared for war; the Supremists believe that, too." Pell reached back into his memory. The Supremists. They were a minor political party -- sort of a cult, too. The outfit had sprung up in the last year or so. Supremists believed that Earthmen, above all other creatures, had a destiny -- were chosen -- were supreme. They had several followers as delegates in World Congress. General impression: slightly crackpot. "The Supremists," said Theodor Rysland, tapping his hard, white palm, and leaning forward, "have been calling for attack. Aggression. Starting the war with Venus all over again. And they're not only a vociferous nuisance. They have an appeal in this business of Earthman's supremacy. They're gaining converts every day. In short, they've now become dangerous." Rysland talked. Certainly the idea of renewed war was nightmarish. He'd been in the last one: who hadn't? It had started in #, the year he was born, and it had dragged on for twenty-five years until T-day and the truce. The causes? Well, both Earth and Venus worked the mineral deposits on Mars unimpeded by the non-intelligent insectile life on that planet, and the original arguments had been about those mineral deposits, though there were enough for a dozen planets there. The causes were more complicated and obscure than that. Semantics, partly. There was freedom as Earthmen saw it and freedom as the Venusians saw it. Same with honor and good and evil. They were always two different things. And then Venusians had a greenish tinge to their skins and called the Earthmen, in their clicking language, "Pink-faces." And both Earthmen and Venusians hated like the devil to see the other get away with anything. Anyway, there had been war, terrible war. Space battle, air battle, landing, repulse. Stalemate. Finally, through utter weariness perhaps, truce. Now, a taut, uneasy, suspicious peace. Communications opened, a few art objects mutually exchanged. Immigration for a few Venusian dancers or students or diplomats. It wasn't much, but it was all in the right direction. At least Pell felt so. Rysland was saying: "We're not sure, of course, but we suspect -- we jeel -- that more than mere accident may be behind these Supremists." "What do you mean by that?" "Someone seeking power, perhaps. As I said, we don't know. We want to find out. Dr. Nebel has been interested for some time in the curious psychology of these Supremists -- their blind, unthinking loyalty to their cause, for instance. He is, as you know, a special assistant in the Department of Education. He asked my help in arranging for an investigation, and I agreed with him wholeheartedly that one should be made." "And I told these gentlemen," said Chief Larkin, "that I'd put a detail on it right away." Now Pell believed he saw through it. Larkin didn't believe it was important at all; he was just obliging these Vips. A man couldn't have too many friends in World Government circles, after all. But of course Larkin couldn't afford to put one of his bright, machineminded boys on it, and so Pell was the patsy. "Could I remind you," said Pell, "that my vacation is supposed to start tomorrow?" "Now, now, Dick," said Larkin, turning on the personality, "this won't take you long. Just a routine report. The computers ought to give you all the information you need in less than a day." "That's what you always say, every time I'm ready to take a vacation. I've been saving up for two years now... "Dick, that's hardly the right attitude for an agent who is so close to making second grade." Larkin had him over a barrel, there. Pell desperately wanted to make his promotion. Second-graders didn't spend their time at the control banks gathering data; they did mostly desk work and evaluation. They had a little more time to spend with their wives. He said, "Okay, okay," and got up. "Where are you going?" "To get my wife on the viewer and tell her I won't be home for a while after all." He left the three of them chuckling and thought: He jests at scars who never felt a wound. He didn't say it aloud. You could quote formulae or scientific precepts in front of Larkin, but not Shakespeare. number and waited until Ciel's image swirled into the viewplate. His heart went boppety-bop as it always did. Hair of polished gold. Dark eyes, ripe olives, a little large for her face and sometimes deep and fathomless. She wore a loose, filmy nightgown and the suggestion of her body under it was enough to bring on a touch of madness in him. "Let me say it," Ceil said. She wasn't smiling. "You won't be home for a while. You've got another case." "Well -- yes. That's it, more or less." Pell swallowed. "Oh, Dick." "I'm sorry, honey. It's just that something important came up. I've got a conference on my hands. It shouldn't take more than an hour." "And we were supposed to leave for the moon in the morning." "Listen, baby, this is absolutely the last time. I mean it. As soon as this thing is washed up we'll really take that vacation. Look, I'll tell you what. I'll meet you somewhere in an hour. We'll have some fun -- take in a floor show -- drink a little meth. We haven't done that in a long time. How about the Stardust Cafe? I hear they've got a terrific new mentalist there." Ciel said, "No." "Don't be like that. We need an evening out. It'll hold us until I get this new case washed up. That won't be long, but at least we'll have a little relaxation." Ciel said, "Well..." "Attababy. One hour. Absolutely. You just go to Station B-#, take the lift to topside and it's right on Shapley Boulevard there. You can't miss it." "I know where it is," said Ciel. She shook her finger. "Richard Pell, so help me, if you stand me up this time..." "Baby!" he said in a tone of deep injury. "Goodbye, Dick." She clicked off. Pell had the feeling that even the free-flowing meth and the gaiety of the Stardust Cafe wouldn't really help matters much. He sighed deeply as he turned and went back into the other room. Chapter II later he stepped from the elevator kiosk at Station B-# and breathed the night air of topside. It was less pure actually than the carefully controlled tunnel air, but it was somehow infinitely more wonderful. At least to a sentimental primitive boob like Richard Pell, it was. Oh, he knew that it was infinitely more sensible to live and work entirely underground as people did these days -- but just the same he loved the look of the black sky with the crushed diamonds of stars thrown across it and he loved the uneven breeze and the faint smell of trees and grass. This particular topside section was given over to entertainment; all about him were theaters and cafes and picnic groves and airports for flying sports. A few hundred feet ahead he could see the three-dimensional atmospheric projection that marked the Stardust Cafe, and he could hear faintly the mournful sound of a Venusian lament being played by the askarins. He was glad they hadn't banned Venusian music, anyway, although he wouldn't be surprised if they did, some day. That was one of the things these Supremists were trying to do. Rysland and Chief Larkin had given him a long and careful briefing on the outfit so that he could start work tomorrow with his partner, Steve Kronski. Steve, of course, would shrug phlegmatically, swing his big shoulders toward the computer rooms and say, "Let's go to work." It would be just another assignment to him. As a matter of fact, the job would be not without a certain amount of interest. There were a couple of puzzling things about these Supremists that Rysland had pointed out. First of all, they didn't seem to be at all organized or incorporated. No headquarters, no officers that anybody knew about. They just were. It was a complete mystery how a man became a Supremist, how they kept getting new members all the time. Yet you couldn't miss a Supremist whenever you met one. Before the conversation was half over he'd start spouting about the destiny of Earthmen and the general inferiority of all other creatures and so on. It sounded like hogwash to Pell. He wondered how such an attitude could survive in a scientific age. Nor would a Supremist be essentially a moron or a neurotic; they were found in all walks of life, at all educational and emotional levels. Rysland told how he had questioned a few, trying to discover when, where and how they joined the movement; Apparently there was nothing to join, at least to hear them tell it. They just knew one day that they were Supremists, and that was the word. Rysland had shaken his head sadly and said, "Their belief is completely without logic -- and maybe that's what makes it so strong. Maybe that's what frightens me about it." Pell would tackle it. Tomorrow he'd think about it. Right now he had a date with his best girl. He entered the cafe and the music of the askarins swirled more loudly about his head and he looked through the smoke and colored light until he spotted Ciel sitting in a rear booth. The place was crowded. On the small dance floor before the orchestra nearly nude Venusian girls were going through the writhing motions of a serpentine dance. Their greenish skins shimmered iridescently. The sadfaced Venusian musicians on the band-stand waved their graceful, spatulated fingers over thair curious, boxlike askarins, producing changing tones and overtones by the altered capacitance. A rocketman in the black and silver uniform of the Space Force was trying to stumble drunkenly out on to the floor with the dancers and his friends were holding him back. There was much laughter about the whole thing. The Venusian girls kept dancing and didn't change their flat, almost lifeless expressions. Ciel looked up without smiling when he got to the booth. She had a half-finished glass of meth before her... He tried a smile anyway. "Hello, baby." He sat down. She said, "I didn't really think you'd get here. I could have had dates with exactly eleven spacemen. I kept count." "You have been faithful to me, Cynara, in your fashion. I need a drink and don't want to wait for the waitress. Mind?" He took her half glass of meth and tossed it down. He felt the wonderful illusion of an explosion in his skull, and it seemed to him that his body was suddenly the strongest in the world and that he could whip everybody in the joint with one arm tied behind his back. He said, "Wow." Ciel tried a smile now. "It does that to you when you're not used to it." The first effect passed and he felt only the warmth of the drink. He signaled a waitress and ordered a couple more. "Don't forget to remind me to take a hangover pill before I go to work in the morning," he told Ciel. "You -- you are going to work in the morning, then?" "Afraid I can't get out of it." "And the moon trip's off?" "Not off, just postponed. We'll get to it, don't worry." "Dick." "Yes?" "I can take it just so' long, putting our vacation off and off and off." Her eyes were earnest, liquid and opaque. "I've been thinking about it. Trying to arrive at something. I'm beginning to wonder, Dick, if maybe we hadn't just better, well -- call it quits, or something." He stared at her. "Baby, what are you saying?" from the orchestra interrupted. They looked at the dance floor. There was a flash of light, a swirling of jnist, and within the space of a second the Venusian girls suddenly disappeared and their place was taken by a tall. hawk-nosed, dark-eyed man with a cloak slung dramatically over one shoulder. The audience applauded. "That's Marco, the new mentalist," said Pell. Ciel shrugged to show that she wasn't particularly impressed. Neither was Pell, to tell the truth. Mentalists were all the rage, partly because everybody could practice a little amateur telepathy and hypnotism in his own home. Mentalists, of course, made a career of it and were much better at it than anybody else. Their drinks came and they watched Marco go through his act in a rather gloomy silence. Marco was skillful, but not especially unusual. He did the usual stuff; calling out things that people wrote on slips of paper, calling out dates on coins, and even engaging in mental duels wherein the challenger wrote a phrase, concealed it from Marco, and then deliberately tried to keep him from reading it telepathically. He had the usual hypnotism session with volunteers who were certain they could resist. He made them hop around the stage like monkeys, burn their fingers on pieces of ice, and so on. The audience roared with laughter. Pell and Ciel just kept staring. When Marco had finished his act and the thundering applause had faded the Venusian dancing girls came back on the stage again. Ciel yawned. Pell said, "Me, too. Let's get out of here." It wasn't until they were home in their underground apartment and getting ready for bed that Ciel turned to him and said, "You see?" He was buttoning his pajamas. "See what?" "It's us, Dick. It's not the floor show, or the meth, or anything -- it's us. We can't enjoy anything together any more." He said, "Now wait a minute..." But she had already stepped into the bedroom and slammed the door. He heard the lock click. "Hey," he said, "what am I supposed to do, sleep out here?" , He took the ensuing silence to mean that he was. And he did. T he next morning, as he came into the office. Pell scowled deeply and went to his desk without saying good morning to anybody. Ciel had kept herself locked in the bedroom and he had made his own breakfast. How it was all going to end he didn't know. He had the feeling that she was working herself up to the decision to leave him. And the real hell of it was that he couldn't exactly blame her. "Morning, partner," said a voice above him. He looked up. Way up. Steve Kronski was built along the general lines of a water buffalo. The usual battered grin was smeared across his face. "I see we got a new assignment." "Oh -- did Larkin brief you on it already?" "Yeah. Before I could get my hat off. Funny set-up, all right. I punched for basic data before you got in. Hardly any." "Maybe that means something in itself. Maybe somebody saw to it that the information never got into the centralbanksu" Tlie C.I.B. computers could be hooked into the central banks which stored information on nearly everything and everybody. If you incorporated, filed for a patent, paid taxes, voted, or just were born, the central banks had an electronic record of it. Kronski jerked his thumb toward the computer room. "I punched for names of Supremist members coupla minutes ago. Thought maybe we could start in that way." Pell followed, his mind not really on the job yet. He wasn't at his best working with the computers, and yet operating them was ninety per cent of investigation. He supposed he'd get used to it sometime. Three walls of the big computer room were lined with control racks, consisting mostly of keyboard setups. Code symbols and index cards were placed in handy positions. The C.I.B. circuits, of course, were adapted to the specialized work of investigation. In the memory banks of tubes and relays there was a master file of all names -- aliases and nicknames included -- with which the organization had ever been concerned. Criminals, witnesses, complaints, everyone. Code numbers linked to the names showed where data on their owner could be found. A name picked at random might show that person to have data in the suspect file, the arrest file, the psychological file, the modus operand! file, and so forth. Any of the data in these files could be checked, conversely, against the names. Kronski walked over to where letter sized cards were flipping from a slot into a small bin. He said. "Didn't even have to dial in Central Data for these. Seems we got a lot of Supremist members right in our own little collection." Pell picked up one of the cards and examined it idly. Vertical columns were inscribed along the card, each with a heading, and with further sub-headed columns. Under the column marked Modus Operandi, for instance, there were subcolumns titled Person Attacked, Property Attacked, How Attacked, Means of Attack, Object of Attack, and Trademark. Columns of digits, one to nine, were under each item. If the digits # and # were punched under Trademark the number # could be fed into the Operational Data machine and this machine would then give back the information on a printed slip that number # stood for the trademark of leaving cigar butts at the scene of the crime. "Got five hundred now," said Kronski. "I'll let a few more run in case we need alternates." "Okay," said Pell. "I'll start this batch through the analyzer." He took the cards across the room to a machine about twenty feet long and dropped them into the feeder at one end. Channels and rollers ran along the top of this machine and under them were a series of vertical slots into which the selected cards could drop. He cleared the previous setting and ran the pointer to Constants. He set the qualitative dial to #. This meant that on the first run the punch hole combinations in the cards would be scanned and any item common to # of the total would be registered in a relay. Upon the second run the machine would select the cards with this constant and drop them into a slot corresponding with that heading. Further scanning, within the slot itself, would pick out the constant number. Pell started the rollers whirring. Kronski came over. He rubbed his battered nose. "Hope we get outside on this case. I'm gettin' sick o' the office. Haven't been out in weeks." Pell nodded. Oh, for the life of a C.I.B. man. In teleplays they cornered desperate criminals in the dark ruins of the ancient cities topside, and fought it out with freezers. The fact was, although regulations called for them to carry freezers in their shoulder holsters, one in a thousand ever got a chance to use them. Pell said, "Maybe you need a vacation." "Maybe. Only I keep putting my vacation off. Got a whole month saved up now." "Me, too." Pell sighed. Ciel would probably be pacing the floor back home now, trying to make up her mind. To break it up, or not to break it up? There would be no difficulty, really: she had been a pretty good commercial artist before they were married and she wouldn't have any trouble finding a job again somewhere in World City. The rollers kept whirring and the cards flipping along with a whispering sound. "Wonder what we're looking into these Supremists for?" asked Kronski. "I always thought they were some kind of harmless crackpots." "The Chief doesn't think so. Neither does Theodor Rysland." He told Kronski more about the interview last night. Presently the machine stopped, clicked several times and began rolling the other way. "Well, it found something," said Kronski. They kept watching. Oh, for the life of a C.I.B. man. Cards began to drop into one of the slots. The main heading was Physical and the sub-heading Medical History. Pell frowned and said, "Certainly didn't expect to find a constant in this department." He picked up a few of the first cards and looked at them, hoping to catch the constant by eye. He caught it. "What's # under this heading?" out," and stepped over to the Operational Data board. He worked it, took the printed slip that came out and called back; "Record of inoculation." "That's a funny one." "Yup. Sure is." Kronski stared at the slip and scratched his neck. "It must be just any old kind inoculation. If it was special -- like typhoid or tetanus or something -- it'd have another digit." "There must be some other boildowns, if we could think of them." Pell was frowning heavily. Some of the other men, used to the machines, could grab a boil-down out of thin air, run the cards again and get another significant constant. The machine, however, inhibited Pell. It made him feel uneasy and stupid whenever he was around it. "How about location?" suggested Kronski. Pell shook his head. "I checked a few by eye. All different numbers under location. Some of 'em come from World City, some from Mars Landing, some from way out in the sticks. Nothing significant there." "Maybe what we need is a cup of coffee." Pell grinned. "Best idea all morning. Come on." Some minutes later they sat across from each other at a table in the big cafeteria on the seventythird level. It was beginning to be crowded now with personnel from other departments and bureaus. The coffee urge came for nearly everybody in the government offices at about the same time. Pell was studying by eye a handful of spare data cards he'd brought along and Kronski was reading faxpaper clippings from a large manila envelope marked Supremist Party. Just on a vague hunch Pell had viewplated Central Public Relations and had them send the envelope down by tube. "Prominent Educator Addresses Supremist Rally," Kronski muttered. "Three Spaceport Cargomen Arrested at Supremist Riot. Young Supremists Form Rocket Club. Looks like anybody and everybody can be a Supremist. And his grandmother. Wonder how they do it?" "Don't know." Pell wasn't really listening. "And here's a whole town went over to the Supremists. On the moon." "Uh-huh," said Pell. Kronski sipped his coffee loudly. A few slender, graceful young men from World Commerce looked at him distastefully. "Happened just this year. New Year they all went over. Augea, in the Hercules Mountains. Big celebration." Pell looked up and said, "Wait a minute..." "Wait for what? I'm not goin' anywhere. Not on this swivel-chair of a job, damn it." "New Year they all become Supremists. And the last week of December everybody on the moon gets his inoculations, right?" "Search me." "But I know that. I found that out when I was tailing those two gamblers who had a place on the moon, remember?" "So it may be a connection." Kronski shrugged. "It may be the place where we can study a bunch of these cases in a batch instead of picking 'em one by one." "You mean we oughta take a trip to the moon?" "Might not hurt for a few days." Kronski was grinning at him. "What are you grinning at?" "First you got to stay over on your vacation, so you can't go to the moon with your wife. Now all of a sudden you decide duty has got to take you to the moon, huh?" Pell grinned back then. "What are you squawking about? You said you wanted to get out on this case." Kronski, still grinning, got up. "I'm not complaining. I'm just demonstrating my powers of deduction, as they say in teleplays. Come on, let's go make rocket reservations." T he big tourist rochet let them down at the Endymion Crater Landing, and they went through the usual immigration and customs formalities in the underground city there. They stayed in a hotel overnight, Pell and Ciel looking very much like tourists, Kronski tagging along and looking faintly out of place. In the morning -- morning according to the # hour earth clock, that is -- they took the jitney rocket to the resort town of Augea, in the Hercules Mountains. The town was really a cliff dwelling, built into the side of a great precipice with quartz windows overlooking a tremendous, stark valley. It was hard to say just what attraction the moon had as a vacation land, and it was a matter of unfathomable taste. You either liked it, or you didn't. If you didn't, you couldn't understand what people who liked it saw in it. They couldn't quite explain. "It's so quiet. It's so vast. It's so beautiful," they'd say, but never anything clearer than that. Augea itself was like twenty other resorts scattered throughout both the northern and southern latitudes of the moon. Except for the military posts and scientific research stations the moon had little value other than as a vacation land. People came there to rest, to look at the bizarre landscape through quartz, or occasionally to don spacesults and go out on guided exploration trips. Immediately after checking into their hotel Pell and Kronski got directions to the office of the Resident Surgeon and prepared to go there. Ciel looked on quietly as Pell tightened the straps of his shoulder holster and checked the setting on his freezer. Ciel said, "I knew it." "Knew what, honey?" Pell went to the mirror to brush his hair. He wasn't sure it would materially improve the beauty of his long, knobby, faintly melancholy face, but he did it any way. "The minute we get here you have to go out on business." He turned, kissed her, then held and patted her hand. "That's just because I want to get it over with. Then I'll have time for you. Then we'll have lots of time together." She melted into him suddenly. She put her arms around .his neck and held him tightly. "If I didn't love you, you big lug, it wouldn't be so bad. But, Dick, I can't go on like this much longer. I just can't." "Now, baby," he started to say. There was a knock on the door then and he knew Kronski was ready. He broke away from her, threw a kiss and said, "Later. Later, baby." She nodded and held her under lip in with her upper teeth. He sighed and left. hotel and started walking along the winding tunnel with the side wall of quartz. On their right the huge valley, with its stark, imearthly landshapes, stretched away. It was near the end of the daylight period and the shadows from the distant peaks, across the valley, were long and deep. Some of them, with little reflected light, seemed to be patches of nothingness. Pell fancied he could step through them into another dimension. All about them, even here in the side of the mountain, and behind the thick quartz, there was the odd, utterly dead silence of the moon. Their footsteps echoed sparsely in the corridor. Pell said to Kronski, "Got the story all straight?" "Like as if it was true." "Remember the signal?" "Sure. Soon as you say we're out of cigarettes. What's the matter, you think I'm a moron, I can't remember?" Pell laughed and clapped him on the shoulder blade. Minutes later they turned in from the corridor, went through another, shorter passageway and then came to a door marked; Resident Surgeon. They knocked and a deep voice boomed: "Come in!" It was a medium-sized room, clearly a dispensary. There was an operating table, a sterilizer, tall glass-fronted instrument cabinets and a refrigerator. At, the far end of the room a hulking, bear-like man sat behind a magnalloy desk. The nameplate on the desk said: Hal H. Wilcox, M.D. "Howdy, gents," said Dr. Hal H. Wilcox, shattering the moon-silence with a vengeance. "What can I do for you?" he was all smiles. That smile, decided Pell, didn't quite match the shrewdness of his eyes. Have to watch this boy, maybe. There was a big quartz window behind the man so that for the moment Pell saw him almost in silhouette. "We're from Current magazine," said Pell. "I'm Dick Pell and this is Steve Kronski. You got our radio, I guess." "Oh, yes. Yes, indeed." Wilcox creaked way back in his chair. "You're the fellas want to do a story on us moon surgeons." "That's right." Pell fumbled a little self-consciously with the gravity weights clipped to his trousers. Took a while for moon visitors t# get used to them, everybody said. "Well, I don't know exactly as how there's much of a story in what we do. We're just a bunch of sawbones stationed here, that's all." "We're interested in the diseases peculiar to the moon," said Pell. "For instance, why do the permanent residents up here have to have an inoculation every year?" "That's for the Venusian rash. Thought everybody knew that." "Venusian rash?" "Nearest thing we ever had to it on Earth was Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. It's a rickettsia disease. Makes a fella pretty sick; sometimes kills Lim in two, three days. It started when they had those Venusian construction workers and tunnel men here, oh, long before the war. Under certain conditions the rickettsia stays dormant and then pops up again." "And the inoculation's for that?" "Standard. Once a year. You got the inoculation yourself, no doubt, before you jumped off for the moon." "Where does the serum or whatever you call it come from?" Pell thought he saw Wilcox's eyes flicker. The doctor said, "It's stored at the main landings. We draw it as we need it from there." "Have any here now?" Wilcox's eyes did move this time. He looked at the refrigerator -- but only for the veriest moment. "Don't really reckon so," he said finally. He was staring blankly at Pell again. Pell patted his pockets, turned to Kronski and said, "You know, I think we're out of cigarettes." Before Kronski could answer he moved to the big quartz window behind Wilcox's desk. He gazed at the moonscape. "Just can't get over how big and quiet it is," he said. Wilcox turned and gazed with him. Kronski drew his freezer. He pointed it, squeezed, and there was a soft, momentary buzzing and a twinkling of violet sparks at the muzzle of the weapon. Wilcox sat where he was, frozen, knowing nothing. on, Steve. Let's get it." They both stepped to the refrigerator. They had only seconds; Kronski' s weapon had been set at a low reading. The time of paralysis varied with the individual and Doc Wilcox looked husky enough not to stay frozen very long. If Pell and Kronski returned to their original positions after he came out of it he would never know that anything had happened. Far back on a lower shelf of the refrigerator were a dozen small bottles of the same type. Pell grabbed one, glanced at the label, nodded, and dropped it into his pocket. They took their places again. A few moments later Wilcox moved slightly and said, "Yup. Moon's a funny place all right. You either like it or you don't." The rest of the conversation was fairly uninspired. Pell didn't want to walk out too quickly, and had to keep up the pretense of interviewing Wilcox for a magazine story. It wasn't easy. They excused themselves finally, saying they'd be back for more information as soon as they made up some notes and got the overall picture -- whatever that meant. Wilcox seemed satisfied with it. They hurried back along the tunnel, descended to another level and found the Augea Post Office. They showed the postmaster their C.I.B. shields and identification cards and arranged for quick and special handling for the bottle of vaccine. Pell marked it Attention, Lab, and it was scheduled to take a quick rocket to the Endymion landing and the next unmanned mail rocket back to World City. Pell stayed at the Post Office to make out a quick report on the incident so he wouldn't have to bore Ciel by doing it in the room, and Kronski sauntered on back to the hotel. There was a fax receiver there and Pell, missing the hourly voice bulletins of World City Underground, checked it for news. The pages were coming out in a long tongue. He looked at the first headline: Well, that was a step in the right direction. Maybe one of these days they'd get around to a Solar Congress, as they ought to. The recent open war with Venus had taught both Earthmen and Venusians a lot about space travel, and it was probably possible to explore the solar system further right now. No one had yet gone beyond the asteroids. Recent observations from the telescope stations here on the moon had found what seemed to be geometrical markings on some of Jupiter's satellites. Life there? Could be. Candidates for a brotherhood of the zodiac -- if both Terrans and Venusians could get the concept of brotherhood pounded through their still partially savage skulls. Another headline; Not so good, that. Loose talk. Actually it was an Undersecretary of War who had said it. Pell ran over the rest of the article quickly and came to what seemed to him a significant excerpt. "Certain patriotic groups in the world today necessary sacrifices to get it over with. There is a fundamental difference between Earthmen and other creatures of the system, and this difference can be resolved only by the dominance of one over the other." Supremist stuff. Strictly. If this Undersecretary were not actually a member he was at least a supporter of the Supremist line. And that line had an appeal for the unthinking, Pell had to admit. It was pleasant to convince yourself that you were a superior specimen, that you were chosen... Pell frowned deeply at that one and read the story. A couple of Venusian miners on Mars had wandered too close to one of the Earth military outposts, and had been nabbed. He doubted that they were spies; he doubted that the authorities holding them thought so. But it seemed to make a better story with a slight scare angle. He thought about how Mars was divided at an arbitrary meridian -- half to Venus, half to Earth. The division solved nothing, pleased nobody. Joe Citizen, the man in the tunnels could see these things, why couldn't these so-called trained diplomats? Pell finished his report, questioned the Postmaster a little on routine facts concerning the town, and went back to the hotel. She was in a smart, frontless frock of silvercloth. Her golden hair shone. Her large, dark eyes looked deep, moist, alive. She looked at him questioningly and he read the silent question : Now can you spare a little time? "Baby," he said softly, and kissed her. "Mm," he said when he had finished kissing her. The voice-phone rang. He said, "Damn it." It was Kronski, in his own room next door. "Did Wilcox leave yet?" he asked. "Wilcox?" "Yeah. The Doc. Is he still there?" "I didn't know he was here at all." Kronski said, "Huh?" Pell said, "Maybe we better back up and start all over again." "Wilcox, the Resident Surgeon Doc Wilcox," said Kronski, not too patiently. "He was in my room a little while ago. Said he'd drop by on his way out and see if you were in." Pell glanced at Ciel. She was busy lighting a cigarette at the other end of the room. Or pretending to be busy. Pell said, "I just got here. Just this minute. I didn't see any Wilcox. What'd he want?" "I don't know exactly. He was kind of vague about it. Wanted to know if he could answer any more questions for us, or anything like that." "Sounds screwy." "Yeah. It sure does, now that I think it over." "Let me call you back," said Pell and hung up. He turned to Ciel. "Was Doc Wilcox here?" "Why, yes. He stopped in." Nothing but blank innocence on her face. "Why didn't you tell me?" "Hm?" She raised her eyebrows. "He just stopped in to see if you were here, that was all. I told him you weren't and he went out again." "But you didn't mention it." "Well, why should I?" "I don't know. I'd think you'd say something about it." "Now, listen, Dick -- I'm not the matter with you, anyway?" "It just strikes me as funny that Wilcox should drop in here and you shouldn't say one word about it, that's all." "Well, I like that." She folded her arms. "You're getting to be so much of a cop you're starting to be suspicious of your own wife." "Now, you know it's not that at all." "What else is it? Dick, I'm sick of it. I'm sick of this whole stupid business you're in. The first time we get a few minutes alone together you start giving me the third degree. I won't stand for it, that's all!" "Now, baby," he said and took a step toward her. The deeper tone of the viewer sounded. Mol. said disgustedly and answered the call. The image of Chief Larkin's boyishly handsome face came into focus on the screen. Pell lifted a surprised eyebrow and said, "Oh, hello, Chief." Larkin's eye was cold. Especially cold in the setting of that boyish face. "What in hell," he asked, "are you and Kronski doing on the moon?" "Hm?" Now it was Pell's turn to look innocent. "Why, you know what we're doing. Chief. We're investigating that case. You know the one -- I don't want to mention it over the viewer." "Who the devil authorized you to go traipsing to the moon to do it?" "Why, nobody authorized us. I thought -- I mean, when you're working on a case and you have a lead, you're supposed to go after it, aren't you?" "Yes, but not when it's a crazy wild goose chase." In the viewer Pell saw the Chief slam his desk with the palm of his hand. "I'd like to know what in blazes you think you can do on the moon that you can't do in a good healthy session at the computers?" "Well, that's kind of hard to explain over the viewer. We have made some progress, though. I just sent you a report on it." Larkin narrowed one eye. "Pell, who do you think you're fooling?" "Fooling?"  "You heard me. I know damn well you wanted to take a vacation on the moon. But we have a little job for you that holds you up, and what do you do? The next best thing, eh? You see to it that the job takes you to the moon." "Now, Chief, it wasn't that at all " "The devil it wasn't. Now, listen to me. Pell. You pack your bags and get right back to World City. The next rocket you can get. You understand?" Before he answered the question he looked at Ciel. She was staring at him quietly. Again he could read something of what was in her mind. He knew well enough that she was trying to say to him: "Make a clean break now. Tell him No, you won't come back. Quit. Now's the time to do it -- unless you want that stupid job of yours more than you want me..." Pell sighed deeply, slowly looked into the viewer again and said, "Kronski and I'll be back on the next rocket. Chief." Chter rV B ack again in the underground offices of C.I.B., Agent Richard Pell plunged into his job. Up to his neck. It was the only way he could keep from brooding about Ciel. She was somewhere in the city at this very moment and if he really wanted to take the trouble he'd be able to find her easily enough -- but he didn't want it to happen that way. She'd never really be his again unless she came to him... And so once more he found himself in the office late at night. Alone. Poring over the lab reports that had come in that afternoon, turning them over in his mind and hoping, he supposed, for a nice intuitive flash, free of charge. As a matter of fact the analysis of the vaccine he'd lifted from Wilcox's dispensary was not without significance. There was definitely an extraneous substance. The only question was just, what this substance might be. Take a little longer to find that out, the report said. It made Pell think of the corny sign World Government officials always had on their desks, the one about doing the difficult right away and taking a little longer for the impossible. Some day, when he was a big-shot, he would have a sign on his desk saying: Why make things difficult when with even less effort you can make them impossible? Of course, ideas like that were probably the very reason he'd never be a big-shot... The Identifier humming. Someone coming again. He looked up, and then had the curious feeling of being jerked back in time to several nights ago. Chief Larkin and Theodor Rysland entered. "Hello, Dick," said Larkin, with a touch of studied democracy. He glanced at the government adviser as if to say: See? Knew we'd find him here. Pell made a sour face. "Some day I'm going to stop giving all this free overtime. Some day I'm not going to show up at all." Rysland smiled, dislodging some of the rock strata of his curiously pale face. He seemed a little weary this evening. He moved slowly and with even more than his usual dignity. He said, "I hope, Mr. Pell, that you'll wait at least until you finish this job for us. I understand you've made some progress." Pell shrugged and gestured at the lab report. "Progress, maybe -- but I don't know how far. Just a bunch of new puzzles to be perfectly frank." Rysland sat down at the other desk and drummed on it with his fingertips. He looked at Pell gravely. "As a matter of fact, since we last talked to you the situation has become even more urgent. A Supremist congressman introduced a bill today before the world delegates which may prove very dangerous. Perhaps you know the one I refer to." "I was too busy to follow the news today," said Pell, looking meaningfully at Larkin. Larkin didn't seem to notice. Rysland said, "I'll brief you then. The bill purports to prohibit material aid of any kind to a nonTerran government. That means both credit and goods. And since the only real non-Terran government we know is Venus, it's obviously directed specifically at the Venusians." Pell thought it over. High level stuff again. He nodded to show he followed. "On the surface," continued Rysland, "this would seem to be a sort of anti-espionage bill. Actually, it's a deliberately provocative act. I know the Venusians will take it that way. But right now certain quarters are secretly trying to negotiate a trade treaty with Venus which would be a major step toward peaceful relations. If this bill became law, such a treaty would be impossible." "But World Congress isn't likely to pass such a bill, is it? Won't they see through it?" Rysland frowned. "That's what we're not sure of. Messages are pouring in urging passage -- all of them from Supremists, of course. The Supremists are relatively few, but they make a lot of noise. Sometimes noise like that is effective. It could swing a lot of delegates who don't see the real danger of this bill and are at the moment undecided. The Defender side, with its desire to isolate and fortify, is especially susceptible." "That is bad," said Pell thoughtfully. the desk. "Now then, if we can somehow discredit the Supremists -- get to the bottom of this thing quickly enough -- I'm sure that bill will be killed. I came here tonight, I suppose, out of pure anxiety. In other words, Mr. Pell, just how far are you?" Pell smiled and shook his head. "Not very, I'm afraid. This Supremist thing is the damndest I ever came across. No central headquarters, no officers, no propaganda mill -- entirely word of mouth as far as I can see. No way of finding out how it started, or even how the new members are proselyted. Ask any member how he became a Supremist. He just looks kind of dreamy and mutters something about the truth suddenly dawning upon him one day." "But don't you have any theories?" "I've got a hunch," Pell said, picking up the lab report. Chief Larkin snorted softly. The snort said clearly enough that an efficient investigator didn't depend on hunches these days: he went after something doggedly on the computer, or by other approved techniques. Pell pretended not to hear the snort. "First of all we discovered that nearly all Supremists received some kind of an inoculation before they became Supremists. Then we found a whole village, one of those moon resort towns, that had gone over. There was the record of inoculation there, too. I got hold of some of the vaccine and had the lab analyze it. It's mostly vaccine all right, but there is a foreign substance in it. Listen." He read from the report: "Isolated point oh six jour seven grams unclassified crystal compound, apparently form of nucleotide enzyme. Further analysis necessary." "You think this enzyme, or whatever it is, has something to do with it?" "I don't know. All I have is a pretty wild theory. To begin, when our lab can't analyze something right away, it's pretty rare -- possibly even unknown to chemistry in general. Now it's just possible that this substance does something to the brain that makes a man into a Supremist, and that somebody's behind the whole thing, deliberately planting the stuff so that people here and there become injected with it." "Pell." Larkin made a pained face. "Really." Pell shrugged. "Well, as I say, it's a hunch, that's all." "It's a pipe dream," said Larkin. "I never heard of anything so fantastic." "That's what folks said a couple of centuries ago when the Venusians were first trying to make contact and their ships were sighted all over the place. T never heard of anything so fantastic,' they all said." Theodor Rysland still looked interested. "Granted there is some connection between the Supremist mental state and this, er, enzyme. What then, Mr. Pell?" "Well," said Pell, stretching his legs out, "I had an idea maybe your friend Dr. Nebel could give us some help on that." "Nebel?" "He's interested in this thing, isn't he?" "Definitely. Nebel's a very public spirited man." "Well, I understand he's one of the top psychobiologists in the country today. Seems to me this new enzyme, whatever it is, would be right up his alley. Of course the lab should get to it eventually, but he might do it a lot quicker." Larkin had been examining some statistical crime charts on the wall. He turned from them. "Pell, does Kronski know about all these wild hunches of yours?" "I haven't talked with him about them yet. He left today before the lab report came in. Why?" "I was just wondering," said Larkin evenly, "whether I had two maniacs in my organization or only one, Rysland, frowning, turned to the chief. "I wouldn't be hasty, Larkin," he said. "Crazy as it sounds Pell may have something here." Larkin snorted again, and this time along with it he shook his head sadly. "What's your next move then?" Rysland asked Pell. "Tomorrow morning, first thing," Pell said, "I'll take a sample, of this stuff to Dr. Nebel and see what he can do with it. Of course the lab can keep on working on it in the meantime." "Don't you think you might do better to get busy on those computers?" Larkin asked. Pell shook his head. "This hunch is too strong, Chief." Rysland smiled, and got up. "I'm inclined to put a little stock into this man's hunches. He's done pretty well with them so far. I'd even say he's pretty close to a solution of this thing -- possibly." Larkin shrugged and started to look at the crime charts again. Rysland held out his hand. "Good night, Mr. Pell. You've encouraged me. Larkin and I are going topside for a little night cap before we turn in. Like to join us?" "No, thanks," said Pell. "I'm sleepy. I want to get home and hit that sack." "Very well. Good night again." The two men went toward the door. Pell watched them quietly. He had lied. He wasn't sleepy at all. He just wanted to get home and sit by that viewer and hope, hope against hope, that it would ring and that Ciel's lovely image would swirl into view... just the least bit tempted to go topside, however. He thought he might like to walk the broad, quiet boulevards under the stars. His brain functioned better there. The tunnels were so clean and bright and sterile, so wonderfully functional and sensible, that they oppressed him somehow. Maybe, he sometimes thought, he wasn't fit for this age. Maybe he should have been born a couple of hundred years ago. But common sense told him that people in that age must have often thought exactly the same thing to themselves. He looked at his chrono and decided he had better go home. The apartment, when he came to it, was cold and empty without Ciel. He bathed and tried to keep up his spirits by singing in his tuneless way, but it didn't help. He went back into the living room, selected a film from the library and slipped it into a lap projector. He sat down and tried to concentrate on the film, a historical adventure about the days of the first moon rockets. He couldn't follow it. The viewer rang. He bounded from the chair as though he had triggered a high speed ejection seat in a burning jet. He went to the viewer and flicked it on. The plate shimmered, and then Giel's image came into focus. "Baby!" He was certain his shout overmodulated every amp tube in the entire World City viewer system. But he felt better, wonderfully better, already. She was smiling. "Hello, Dick." "Hello." And then they looked at each other in afifectionate embarrassment for a moment. "One of us," said Pell, "ought to have his script writer along." "Dick, I don't know exactly how to say what I want to say..." "Don't. Don't say anything. Just pretend nothing ever happened. Just come on home fast as you can." "No, Dick. Not yet. I still want to talk about -- well, everything. Dick, we've got to reach some sort of compromise. There must be a way." "Come on home. We'll find a way." "Not home. Too many memories there. Besides," she smiled a little, "I don't trust us alone together. You know what would happen. We wouldn't get any talking done. Not any sensible talking anyway. You'd better meet me someplace." He sighed. "Okay. Where can I meet you?" "How about the Stardust Cafe?" "Again? That place didn't help us much the last time." "I know, but it's the handiest. I'm sure we can find a quiet place. Out on the terrace or something." "Is there a terrace?" "Yes, I think so. I'm sure there must be." He looked at his chrono. "All right, baby. Half an hour?" "Half an hour." When she clicked of! he felt his heart pounding. He felt dizzy. He felt as though he had just taken a quart of meth at one jolt -- intravenously. He sang, more loudly and more off-key than ever. He went into the bedroom and started to get dressed again. It wasn't until he was finishing the knot in his tie that the hunch hit him. hunch. He would have said it came out of nowhere, and yet it must have broken from the bottom of his mind through some kind of restraining layer into the conscious levels. He didn't remember .thinking anything that might have brought it on -- his mind was strictly on Ciel. Maybe that was how it came through, with the attention of his conscious mind directed elsewhere. With the hunch he heard Ciel's voice again, heard it very clearly. saying: "Vm sure we can find a quiet place. Out on the terrace or something." And with that other things started to fall into place. As he thought, and as the possibilities of his hunch fanned out to embrace other possibilities he became suddenly cold and sick inside. He fought the feeling. "Got to go through with it," he muttered to himself. "Got to." As soon as he was dre.ssed he took the tunnel cars to Station D-#, changing twice. People were aboard at this hour, returning from the evening. Lots of men and women in uniform: the green of the landfighters, the white of the seamen, the blue of the flyers, the silver and black of the space force. Young people. Kids mostly: kids who had never seen war, smelled death, heard the wounded scream. He hoped they never would. But if his hunch was correct they might be dangerously near to it right now. If only he had time to call Kronski. He'd feel a lot safer... He shook himself. Have to stop thinking about it. Proceed cautiously now, and take each thing as it came. That was the only thing to do. He went topside and stepped from the elevator kiosk into the night air. Ahead he saw the bright globular sign of the Stardust Cafe. But he didn't go toward it right away. He turned in the other direction, walked swiftly, and kept a sharp eye on the shadows. He turned off on a side street, circled a small park, and then crossed a sloping lawn toward the back of the night club. He headed for the light of the service entrance. A half-credit bill got him inside through the back entrance. He found the door with the temporary sign saying: Marco the Mentalist. He knocked. Marco the Mentalist opened the door. He didn't look quite as tall face-to-face as he did out on the floor, nor quite as impressive. His face was still dark and faintly saturnine, but the jowls seemed a little puffier now, there was a faint network of capillaries around his nostrils and his eyes looked just the least bit ' y and tired. In a pleasant l gh voice he said, "Yes?" Pell showed his C.I.B. identification. Marco raised his eyebrows a little and said, "Come inside, please." Inside he found a chair for Pell. He sat across from him at his dressing table, half-turned toward the room. "I must get ready for my show in a little while. You understand that, of course." Pell nodded. "What's on my mind won't take long. First of all, I want to ask a few questions about hypnotism. They may seem silly to you, or maybe a little elementary, but I'd like you to answer 'em just the same." Marco's eyebrows went a little bit higher and he said, "Proceed." "Okay. Question number one: can anybody be hypnotized against his will?" "Some can, some can't." Marco smiled. "The average person, under average circumstances -- no. I appear in my act to hypnotize people against their wills. Actually, subconsciously, they wish to be hypnotized, which is why they volunteer to let me try in the first place." "Okay, number two. Is there any drug that can hypnotize a person?" Marco frowned. "Pentothal and several things appear to do that. You could argue it either way, whether the subject is actually hypnotized or not. I believe post-hypnotic commands have been given to subjects under sodium pentathol and carried out, even back in the dark ages of psychiatry several hundred years ago." "I've got one more really important question," Pell said then. "I'd understood that somebody under hypnosis won't do anything against his moral or ethical sense. An honest man, for instance, can't be forced to steal. Is that true?" Marco laughed and gestured with his graceful fingers. "I don't think it is true. It was once believed to be, because hypnotic technique was not strong enough. That is, the subject's hypnosis was not strong enough to overcome a strong moral sense, which is actually a surface veneer on a deeper, more brutal nature. But I think with deep enough hypnosis, and the right kind of command, you can get a person to do most anything in post-hypnotic behavior -- and of course not know why he must do it, even knowing it's wrong. Do you follow me?" "I hope I do." Then Pell leaned forward. "And now I have a very great favor to ask of you." "Yes?" "I want you to put on a little special private performance for me, right here and now." "I'm afraid I don't understand." "You will, in about sixty seconds. Just listen carefully..." Chapter V H e was late for his date with Ciel, of course. He glanced at his chrono as he entered the Stardust Cafe by the front door and saw that he was twenty minutes late. However, this time he was certain Ciel wouldn't complain too vigorously. Again the askarins were playing, and once more the green-skinned Venusian girls were doing their writhing, spasmodic, aphrodisiacal dance. It was remarkable how they could achieve such an effect of utter abandon and yet keep their faces blank and frozen. He looked around the rest of the room swiftly. Not so crowded tonight, and people were generally quieter. There were no oversexed spacemen clawing after the dancers on the floor. Ciel was again in a rear booth, in the same corner of the room she had chosen before. She had spotted him now; she was looking his way. She lifted a white-gloved hand and waved. He smiled and  headed for her. He forced his smile, and made himself forget the prickling of his wrists and the feeling of bristling fur along his spine. And he held his smile all the way across the room. Why, hello, darling, fancy seeing you here; no, nothing's wrong, nothing at all, why on earth would you think anything was wrong? "Hi, baby," was all he actually said. "I'm -- I'm glad you're here, Dick." Her eyes didn't show much. They roved over his face a little too much perhaps, but otherwise they seemed simply as large and dark as ever. He noticed that the meth glass in front of her was empty. Grinning, he sat down. "This is a big moment. This is almost too much for me to handle. Maybe that's what I need -- a good slug of meth." "No." "No?" "Let's not waste time. Let's go out on the terrace. I want you to kiss me." "Best offer I've had all evening." He rose again. "Where's the terrace?" "Through that door. There's a dining room there that's closed at night. You go through the dining room and out to the terrace." "Okay." He took her arm and led her in and out of tables, across the room. They moved swiftly through the quiet, nearly dark dining room, and after that through a pair of window-doors. They were on the terrace then, a flagstoned space with a low wall. It overlooked the scattered lights of World City's topside area and some distance beyond they could see the river, a blue-silver ribbon in the moonlight. They stopped at the wall. She turned toward him. He looked down at her, at her pale face and deep, dark eyes. He smelled her perfume and he felt her live warmth near him and coming nearer. He saw her eyes close, her lips part just slightly, and each lip glistening, faintly moist... He was wondering when it would happen. He was wondering when he would be struck. As he wondered that he suddenly discovered he wasn't on the terrace any more. H e looked about him in some surprise. It was nearly dark. He was in a room; he could sense the walls about him. He heard a curious, high-pitched metallic voice -- and recognized it. "Pell? Are you awake now?" It had happened then, just as he had expected. Someone had thrown a freezer on him there in the patio, and during his complete unconsciousness he'd been taken here, wherever this was. He sighed. The least they could have done would have been to let him finish kissing Ciel. As calmly as he could he said to the four blank walls, "I'm awake." Soft glowlights came on gradually and he saw that the room about him was fairly small -- twenty by fifteen, roughly -- and very plain. It contained a bed and a few odd pieces of furniture, all apparently of good quality. There was a door in one wall. He tried the door. Locked. He went back to the middle of the room. "Chief," he said to the blank walls, "what's this all about? Is it some kind of a joke?" The metallic voice chuckled. It belonged to Eustace J. Larkin, Chief, Central Investigation Bureau, and even filtered like this it was somewhat prim and precise. "No, Dick, it's not a joke. I'm afraid. I'm surprised you haven't guessed what it's all about. Or at hunches." There was sarcasm in this last. "Where's Ciel?" Pell asked. "Right here with me. In the next room. Here -- listen." Ciel's voice said, "Don't worry, darling, we'll explain everything. And when it's all over it will be for the best. You'll see that it will." "All right, everybody," said Pell, half-belligerently, "what's the big idea?" "Big idea is right," Larkin's voice came back. "The biggest that ever hit the human race. And as Ciel says we'll explain it all in a moment. But first I'd like your word that you won't be foolish and make any kind of a struggle. If you'll promise that you can come in the other room here and we can all talk face to face." Pell frowned. "I don't know -- I'm not so sure I can honestly promise that." "Suit yourself, then. A few minutes from now it won't make any difference anyway." "Will you stop being so damned mysterious and tell me what it's all about?" Larkin's voice laughed. "Very well. I haven't had much chance to tell about it, frankly. And I think you'll agree we've rather neatly kept our parts under cover -- until you got dangerously close to the answer, anyway." "Until I got close?" "Certainly. Doc Wilcox's office on the moon was perhaps our one weakness in the whole set-up. How you managed to stumble on to that, ni never know -- your luck must have been with you." "It wasn't luck, Larkin, it was a hunch." "Still believe in hunches, eh? Well, we won't argue the point. At any rate you wouldn't have found the enzyme any place else but there." "Oh, so the enzyme does have something to do with it." "Everything. Here -- suppose I let Doctor Nebel explain it to you. He developed it, after all." Pell lifted his eyebrows in surprise and Dr. Walter Nebel's sibilant voice came through the hidden speakers. "I think you should know how it works, Mr. Pell. You may know that a certain part of the brain called Rossi's area is, to put it figuratively, the hypnotic center. The cut-off of the adrenal cortex, so to speak. In ordinary hypnosis the function of that area is dulled by overexercising the motor senses. By that method the intensity of hypnosis is widely variable and never really one hundred per cent effective. My compound, however, brings about complete and absolute cut-off. Any post-hypnotic suggestion given under those circumstances takes permanently and deeply. It can only be removed by further post-hypnosis under the same treatment, negating the original command." Pell stared at the blank walls. !'Go on," he said in a soft, tense voice. "What's the rest?" Larkin spoke again. "Suppose we briefly examine a little history as a kind of introduction to this matter. The human race, since the beginning of recorded time, has failed to achieve real peace and stability, right? Every time there has been a chance for cooperative effort -- for total agreement -- certain selfish interests have spoiled it. There have been times, however, when certain groups' -- states or combinations of states -- came close to permanent peace and prosperityThe Napoleonic era was one. Hitler two hundred years ago almost brought it about. The only reason they failed was that they didn't achieve their goal -- complete conquest." Did Pell hear correctly? Was there a faint simmering of madness in that metallic voice now? In the words there was madness, surely... Pell, people simply don't know what's good for them. Look at the blunderers and even downright crooks who are elected to World Government. Never the best brains, never the best talents. When a really able man gets into a position of leadership it's an accident -- n fluke." "I still don't see what all this has got to do with it," said Pell. There was a shrug in the metallic voice. "For once the ablest men are going to take over. There are a number of us. You know already about myself and Doctor Nebel. Rysland will be with us, too, as soon as we can get him conditioned." "By conditioned, you mean this enzyme of yours?" "Exactly. We started out in a small way, using force or trickery where necessary, and managed to condition a number of doctors and nurses. Conditioning simply means injecting Nebel's compound and then giving the post-hypnotic command to be unquestioningly loyal to the Supremists. We created the Supremists, of course. In order for us to take over it will be necessary to have another war, and to conquer Venus. That can be done if Earth strikes quickly. Within the next few days I think there'll be enough Supremist influence to get this war started." Pell stared back, open-mouthed. To hear it coldly and calmly like this was shock, cold-water shock. "Let me get this straight now. Your group made Supremists of doctors and nurses and they in turn made new members by installing this hypnosis stuff whenever anybody came for a hypodermic injection of any kind, is that it?" "That's It." "But how does this stuff work? Does it knock you out, or what?" "You'll be finding that out at first hand very shortly." Pell stiffened, made fists and unconsciously lifted them and looked around him, warily. Larkin laughed. "It won't do you much good to put up a fight. I'm sending a couple of my assistants in there. They specialize in people who want to make a struggle. And there's no reason to feel unhappy about it. Pell : once you're conditioned you'll simply be unable to do anything against the Supremist cause. You'll be happier, in fact, having such a cause. Ask your wife if that isn't so." Pell trembled with anger. "How did you get to her? How did you make her do what she did?" "You mean luring you into our little trap on the terrace, so to speak? You mustn't blame Ciel for that. She couldn't help herself; she had to obey, after all. You see she was conditioned in Augea on the moon by Dr. Wilcox, one of our very loyal men. He simply dropped in when you were at the Post Office, pretended that Ciel needed a routine injection and she, not at all suspicious, allowed him to do it. He gave her the command of loyalty, and also cautioned her not to say anything about it. So you see, Ciel's been one of us for several days. It was just a little precaution of mine, in case you should become troublesome. I had to assign somebody to the investigation, of course, because Rysland and his crowd would have been too suspicious if I hadn't complied with their request." "You're stark crazy, Larkin! You ought to be in a mental hospital!" "You'll be over that idea in a minute or so. Meanwhile, we're wasting time. I'm sending the boys in now. You'll make it easier for yourself if you submit without giving them any trouble." The door opened, then. Pell caught a quick glimpse of the other room and saw that it was a tastefully furnished living room. He recognized it, and knew where he was. This was a country house of Larkin's, topside, not far from the outskirts of World City. Whoever turned the freezer on him must have set the control at high intensity because it would take at least an hour to get to this place from the Stardust Cafe and he had been unconscious at least that long. He had the momentary impulse to rush that partly opened door -- and then the boys, as Larkin had called them, appeared. T hey were specialists, little doubt of that. They regarded Pell with flat, almost disinterested looks as the door closed behind them. One held a hypodermic needle. He was the shorter of the two, but he had shoulders like oxyokes. His face had been kneaded in the prize ring, and his bare arms were muscular and hairy but the top of his head was bald. The other had red hair, close-cropped. He waS' big and well-proportioned ; Pell might have taken him for a professional football player. Red did the talking. He spoke quietly, almost pleasantly. "Gonna cooperate?" he asked Pell. Pell said, "You touch me, brother, and I'll make your face look like Baldy's." Red glanced at Baldy and seemed to sigh. Abruptly he whirled, jumped at Pell and brought a sizzling right hand punch through the air. Pell ducked it. He saw Baldy move in as he did so, and a painful blow struck the back of his neck. His teeth rattled when it struck. Something caught him under the chin, straightened him. When he was straight a pile driver struck him in the midsection. It was all over within a matter of seconds. Under different circumstances Pell might have found time to admire their technique. As it was, he was now face down on the floor and Red was straddling him, holding him there. The pain in his stomach made him gasp. His face and the back of his neck ached terribly. Red had his arm in the small of his back. Pell tried to struggle. "I can break the arm if you move," said Red cheerfully. And then Pell felt the bite of the needle just below his shoulder. A misty feeling came. He felt as though he were in a red whirlpool, spinning, going down -- down... He fought to rise. He could still hear. He could hear footsteps and the slam of the door when somebody else came into the room. And then he seemed abruptly to be detached from his own body and floating in a huge gray void... Words hammered at his brain. Larkin's voice, at his ear now and no longer metallic. "You will be loyal to the Supremist cause. You will do nothing against the Supremist doctrine. You will believe that Earthmen are meant to rule the Universe -- " He felt an overpowering impulse to nod, to agree, to believe that it was right to do this. He fought this impulse, straining his mind and his very being until it seemed that something might burst with the effort. "You will work for the cause; you will give your life for it if necessary.'"' Yes, perhaps it was better so succumb. The words were too strong. He couldn't fight them. Larkin was right, Earthmen were supreme, and they were destined to rule... Somewhere in the depths a tiny spot of resistance still glowed. He tried desperately to evoke it. It seemed then that it became brighter. He could resist -- he would... He kept thinking over and over again; "No, no, no!" Larkin's voice said, "Carry him in the other room. He'll come to in a moment." H e came to slowly, and he saw that he was lying on a couch and that several people were gathered around him smiling down at him. Something detached itself from the group, knelt by his side. He blinked. It was Ciel. Her golden hair shone and her dark eyes searched his face and she was smiling. "Hello, darling," she said. "Hello, Ciel." He kissed her, and then sat up on the couch and looked around. Larkin and Dr. Nebel were standing together, and Red and Baldy were a few steps behind them, still looking indifferent. "Now you're one of us, Dick," said Larkin, flashing his professional smile, dimples and everything. Pell rose. Nebel held his hands behind his back and beamed, blinking his heavy reptilian eyelids and Larkin stepped forward and held out his hand. "Yes," said Pell, shaking the hand, "I guess we're all working for the same thing now. What do you want me to do?" Larkin laughed. "Nothing right away. We'll give you instructions when the time comes. I think you might as well go home with Ciel now; I have a copter and a chauffeur outside that'll take you to the station near your apartment." "Okay, Chief, whatever you say." He smiled and took Ciel's arm. He started toward the door. Then he stopped, patted his chest and said, "Oh -- my freezer. I guess the boys took it away... Larkin turned to Baldy. "Give him his weapon." Baldy took the freezer from his pocket and casually tossed it to Pell. A sudden change came over Pell, then. His smile disappeared. He stepped quickly away from Ciel, whirled and faced all of them. He pointed the freezer. "All right, everybody stay perfectly still -- you, too, Ciel. This is where we break up your little Supremist nightmare." Larkin stared in utter amazement. Nebel's turtle lids opened wide. Ciel brought her hand to her throat. Red's hand blurred suddenly, going for his own weapon. Pell squeezed the trigger, the violet sparks danced for an instant, and then Red stood frozen with his hand almost to his chest. "I'd advise nobody else to try that," said Pell, and then in an ironical tone to Larkin: "C.I.B. agents are trained to be pretty quick with a freezer, right. Chief?" Larkin seemed to find his voice now "But -- how -- what happened? You were injected. How can you..." "I just took a little precaution, that's all,'; said Pell. "There'll be plenty of time to explain it all later. You'll probably hear the whole thing in court, Larkin, when I testify at your trial for treason. Meanwhile, all of you just stay nice and calm while I use the viewer." He stepped to the viewer and dialed with his free hand. The plate glowed, shimmered and a moment later the pale, grave face of Theodor Rysland came into view. His eyebrows rose as he saw the weapon in Pell's hand and glimpsed the people beyond Pell. "Hello -- what's this all about?" "Haven't time to explain fully now," said Pell, "but I want you to get to Larkin's country house as soon as you can. I'll call agent Kronski in a moment and have him bring some others, and together we'll take Larkin and Nebel into custody. They're behind the Supremist movement -- a deliberate attempt to take over the government. They did it with a drug; that's how Supremist's are made." "What's this? A drug?" "Think about it later," said Pell. "Just grab the facts right now. The drug makes a person subject to post-hypnotic commands -- that's why your Supremists are blindly, unthinkingly loyal. However, the command can be erased by a second treatment. That'll be tough and take a lot of ferreting out, but it won't be impossible." He glanced at Ciel, and saw that she was staring at him with horror -- with enmity. It sickened him, but he steadied himself with the realization that Ciel would be one of the first to be re-treated. had completed his calls. Rysland, Kronski and the others were on the way. He kept the freezer pointed, and watched his captives carefully. Ciel had gone over to the couch and was sitting there, her face in her hands, weeping softly. "I don't know how you did it," said Larkin. "I don't understand it. The injection should have worked. It always did before." "Well, it almost worked," said Pell. "I must admit I had quite a time fighting off your commands. But, you see, I knew you'd gotten to Ciel somehow when she called me up to make the date this evening. She spoke of going out to the terrace at the Stardust Cafe. It was a little odd that she should speak of the terrace like that, out of a clear sky -- and I wondered why it should be on her mind. Then it struck me that neither of us had ever noticed a terrace there, and Ciel must have some special reason for knowing about it. "She did, of course -- she'd been instructed to get me out there where your boys could slap a freezer on me. So I started guessing with that hunch to work on. Everything more or less fell into place after that. It was pretty certain that they'd try to make a loyal Supremist out of me, too, and that's when I took that little precaution I mentioned to you." "What precaution?" Pell smiled. "I had Marco the mentalist hypnotize me and give me a rather special post-hypnotic command. He ordered me not to believe any subsequent post-hynotic commands. That's why your conditioning didn't work on me." Larkin could find no words; he just stared. "Think about it, Larkin," said Pell. "Think hard. Maybe you'd convinced yourself you were doing good, but your purpose was still tyranny. And like any tyranny it contained the means of its own destruction. It always works out that way, Larkin -- maybe it's a law, or something." It had been a long speech for Pell, practically an oration. He was, after all, a cop, not a philosopher. Just a guy trying to get along. Just an ordinary citizen whose name was legion, looking at his yife now and waiting with what patience he could find for the time when she would be cleared of the poisonous doctrine that any one race or group or even species was supreme. He was thinking, too, that the trial would keep him busy as the very devil and that they still wouldn't get to that vacation and seconcf honeymoon for a long time... That, considering everything, was not too much to put up with. small, and we'll continue this policy of devoting most of our space to the best available stories. But if you'll take time (and a postcard) to tell us which stories you like best, we'll tabulate and run the results in a special section -- and of course our future selections will be based on your wishes. Fair enough? She was sweet, gentle, kind -- a sort of Martian Old Mother Hubbard. But when she went to her cupboard... By Tom Leahy T he clod burst in a cloud of red sand and the little Martian sand dog ducked quickly into his burrow. Marilou threw another at the aperture in the ground and then ran over and with the inside of her foot she scraped sand into it until it was filled to the surface. She started to leave, but stopped. The little fellow might choke to death, she thought, it wasn't his fault she had to live on Mars. Satisfied that the future of something was dependent on her whim, she dug the sand from the hole. His little yellow eyes peered out at her. "Go on an' live," she said magnanimously. She got up and brushed the sand from her knees and dress, and walked slowly down the red road. The noon sun was relentless; nowhere was there relief from it. Marilou squinted and shaded her eyes with her hand. She looked in the sky for one of those infrequent Martian rain clouds, but the deep blue was only occasionally spotted by fragile white puffs. Like the sun, they had no regard for her, either. They were too concerned with moving toward the distant mountains, there to cling momentarily to the peaks and then continue on their endless route. Marilou dabbed the moisture from her forehead with the hem of her dress. "I know one thing," she mumbled. "When I grow up. I'll get to Earth an' never come back to Mars, no matter what!" She broke into a defiant, cadenced step. "An' I won't care whether you an' Mommy like it or not!" she declared aloud, sticking out her chin at an imaginary father before her. Before she realized it, a tiny, lime-washed stone house appeared not a hundred yards ahead of her. That was the odd thing about the Martian midday; something small and miles away would suddenly become large and very near as you approached it. The heat waves did it, her father had told her. "Really?" she had replied, and -- you think you know so doggone much, she had thought. into a run. By the Joshua trees, through the stone gateway she ran, and with a leap she lit like a young frog on the porch. "Hi, Aunt Twylee!" she said breathlessAn ancient Martian woman sat in a rocking chair in the shade of the porch. She held a bowl of purple river apples in her lap. Her papyrus-like hands moved quickly as she shaved the .skin from one. In a matter of seconds it was peeled. She looked up over her bifocals at the panting Marilou. "Gracious child, you shouldn't run like that this time of day," she said. "You Earth children aren't used to our Martian heat. It'll make you sick if you run too much." "I don't care! I hate Mars! Sometimes I wish I could just get good an' sick, so's I'd get to go home!" "Marilou, you are a little tyrant!" Aunt Twylee laughed. "Watcha' doin'. Aunt Twylee?" Marilou asked, getting up from her frog posture and coming near the old Martian lady's chair. "Oh, peeling apples, dear. I'm going to make a cobbler this afternoon." She dropped the last apple, peeled, into the bowl. "There, done. Would you like a little cool apple juice, Marilou?" "Sure -- you betcha! Hey, could I watch you make the cobbler. Aunt Twylee, could I? Mommy can't make it for anything -- it tastes like glue. Maybe, if I could see how you do it, maybe I could show her. Do you think?" "Now, Marilou, your mother must be a wonderful cook to have raised such a healthy little girl. I'm sure there's nothing she could learn from me," Aunt Twylee said as she arose. "Let's go inside and have that apple juice." The kitchen was dark and cool, and filled with the odors of the wonderful edibles the old Martian had created on and in the Earthmade stove. She opened the Earthmade refrigerator that stood in the corner and withdrew an Earthmade bottle filled with Martian apple juice. Marilou jumped up on the table and sat cross-legged. "Here, dear." Aunt Twylee handed her a glass of the icy liquid. "Ummm, thanks," Marilou said, and gulped down half the contents. "That tastes dreamy, Aunt Twylee." The little girl watched the old Martian as she lit the oven and gathered the necessary ingredients for the cobbler. As she bent over to get a bowl from the shelf beneath Marilou's perch, her hair brushed against the child's knee. Her hair was soft, soft and white as a puppy's, soft and white like the down from a dandelion. She smiled at Marilou. She always smiled; her pencil-thin mouth was a perpetual arc. Marilou drained the glass. "Aunt Twylee -- is it true what my daddy says about the Martians?" "True? How can I say, dear? I don't know what he said." "Well, I mean, that when us Earth people came, you Martians did inf... infan..." "Infanticide?" Aunt Twylee interrupted, rolling the dough on the board a little flatter, a little faster. "Yes, that's it -- killed babies," Marilou said, and took an apple from the bowl. "My daddy says you were real primitive, an' killed your babies for some silly religious reason. I think that's awful! How could it be religious? God couldn't like to have little babies killed!" She took a big bite of the apple; the juice ran from the corners of her mouth. "Your daddy is a very intelligent man, Marilou, but he's partially wrong. It is true -- but not for religious reasons. It was a necessity. You must remember, dear. Mars is very arid -- sterile -- unable to sustain many living things. It was awful, but it was the only way we knew to control the population." M arilou looked down her button nose as she picked a brown spot from the apple. "Hmmph, I'll tell 'im he's wrong," she said. "He thinks he knows so damn much!" "Marilou!" Aunt Twylee exclaimed as she looked over her glasses. "A sweet child like you shouldn't use such language!" Marilou giggled and popped the remaining portion of the apple in her mouth. "Do your parents know where you are, child?" Aunt Twylee asked, as she took the bowl from Marilou's hands. She began dicing the apples into a dough-lined cassarole. "No, they don't," Marilou replied. She sprayed the air with little particles of apple as she talked. "Everybody's gone to the hills to look for the boys." "The boys?" Aunt Twylee stopped her work and looked at the little girl. "Yes -- Jimmy an' Eddie an' some of the others disappeared from the settlement this morning. The men're afraid they've run off to th' hills an' the renegades got 'em." "Gracious," Aunt Twylee said; her brow knitted into a criss-cross of wrinkles. "Oh, I know those dopes. They're prob'ly down at th' canals -- fishin' or somep'n." "Just the same, your mother will be frantic, dear. You should have told her where you were going." "I don't care," Marilou said with unadulterated honesty. "She'll be all right when I get home." Aunt Twylee shook her head and clucked her tongue. "Can I have another glass? Please?" The old lady poured the glass full again. And then she sprinkled sugar down among the apple cubes in the cassarole and covered them with a blanket of dough. She cut an uneven circle of half moons in it and put it in the oven. "There -- all ready to bake, Marilou," she sighed. "It looks real yummy, Aunt Twylee." "Well, I certainly hope it turns out good, dear," she said, wiping her forehead with her apron. She looked out the open back door. The landscape was beginning to gray as heavier clouds moved down from the mountains and pressed the afternoon heat closer, more oppressively to the ground. "My, it's getting hot. I wouldn't be a bit surprised if we didn't get a little rain this afternoon, Marilou." She turned back to the little girl. "Tell me some more about your daddy, dear. We Martians certainly owe a lot to men like your father." "That's what he says too. He says, you Martians would have died out in a few years, if we hadn't come here. We're so much more civi... civili... "Civilized?" "Yeah. He says, we were so much more 'civ-ilized' than you that we saved your lives when we came here with all our modern stuff." "Well, that's true enough, dear. Just look at that wonderful Earth stove," Aunt Twylee said, and laughed. "We wouldn't be able to bake an apple cobbler like that without it, would we?" dered through the crow'ded hot air. "No. He says, you Martians are kinda likeable, but you can't be trusted. He's nuts! I like you Martians!" "Thank you, child, but everyone's endtled to his own opinion. Don't judge your daddy too severely," Aunt Twylee said as she scraped spilled sugar from the table and put little bits of it on her tongue. "He says that you'd bite th' hand that feeds you. He says, we brought all these keen things to Mars, an' that if you got th' chance, you'd kill all of us!" "Gracious," said Aunt Twylee as she speared scraps of dough with the point of her long paring knife. "He's a dope!" Marilou said. Aunt Twylee opened the oven and peeked in at the cobbler. The aroma of the simmering apples rushed out and filled the room. "Could I have some cobbler when it's done?" Marilou asked, "I'm afraid not, child. It's getting rather late." The thunder rumbled again -- a little closer, a little louder. The old lady washed the blade of the knife in the sink. "Tell me more of what your father says, dear," she said as she adjusted the bifocals on her thin nose and ran her thumb along the length of the knife's blade. "Oh, nothin' much more. He just says that you'd kill us if you had th' chance. That's the way the inferior races always act, he says. They want to kill th' people that help 'em, 'cause they resent 'em." "Very interesting." "Well, it isn't so, is it. Aunt Twylee?" The room was filled with blinding blue-white light, and the walls quaked at the sound of a monstrous thunderclap. The old Martian glanced nervously at the clock on the wall. "My, it is getting late," she said as she fondled the knife in her hands. "You Martians wouldn't do anything like that, would you?" "You want the truth, don't you, dear?" Aunt Twylee asked, smiling, as she walked to the table where Marilou sat. "'Course I do. Aunt Twylee," she said. Her scream was answered and smothered by the horrendous roar of the thunder, and the piercing hiss of the rain that fell in sheets. In great volumes of water, it fell, as though the heavens were attempting to wash the sins of man from the universe and into non-existence in the void beyond the void. M arilou lay beside the other children. Aunt Twylee smiled at them, closed the bedroom door and returned to the kitchen. The storm had moved on; the thunder was the faint grumbling of a pacified old man. What water fell was a monotonous trickle from the eaves of the lime-washed stone house. Aunt Twylee washed the blood from the knife and wiped it dry on her apron. She opened the oven and took out the browned cobbler. Sweet apple juice bubbled to the surface through the half moons and burst in delights of sugary aroma. The sun broke through the thinning edge of the thunderhead. Aunt Twylee brushed a lock of her feathery white hair from her moist cheek. "Gracious," she said, "I must tidy up a bit before the others come." Donald W. Kerst D onald w. kerst is probably unknown except in the upper strata of scientific research, but he's the man who is almost solely responsible for the betatron. The lanky six-footer was born in Galena, Kansas, in #. The Kerst family moved to Wawatosa, Wisconsin, when Donald was less than two years old, and it was in this small town that Don grew up and went to high school. He had a school chum who was an ardent amateur radio operator, and it was while helping this friend build constantly better ham apparatus that Donald Kerst's interest in science grew into an abiding passion. He entered the University of Wisconsin where he got both his B. A. and his Ph.D. After a year at the GenPersonalities in Science His Specialty: T urning New Corners eral Electric Laboratories working with X-ray tubes, he accepted the post of Professor of Physics at the University of Iowa. Kerst had started research into the nature of the atom while studying for his doctorate, and now he picked up where he had left off. In #I he was able to announce that he had achieved a new instrument of research capable of accelerating electrons to a velocity approximating the speed of light, or # miles per second! He described this new too as a "rheotron, the heart of which is a doughnut-shaped glass vacuum tube placed between the poles of a large electromagnet." The United States Government snapped up the new instrument for use in arsenals and on the Manhattan Project during the war. It was a dependable, foolproof, economical tool with the ability to penetrate twenty inches of steel with its radiation in twenty minutes, and to detect flaws of twothousandths of an inch. The units used in arsenals are able to detect flaws in bombs and shells so they can be corrected, eliminating any danger of the projectiles exploding prematurely. The commercial betatron was five feet by ten feet and housed behind a three-foot reinforced concrete wall in a specially designed building. In this particular machine the electrons from a hot filament were speeded in their acceleration by electrical impulses until they reached # volts -- then released from the tube as beta rays or directed at a metal target which converted them into X-rays.iwas using the betatron during the war and finding it most satisfactory, Kerst went right on improving the machine and its performance. Ever since the first betatron worked, the desire of the scientists and physicists was to produce particles with cosmic ray energies. Within four years after the commercial betatron, Kerst was able to produce one that achieved a #-volt free-electron beam with which it was po.ssible to penetrate to the core of the atom and to study the nucleus in a way that had never before been possible. After fifteen months of actual construction work the super-betatron was ready for a trial run. When asked by reporters to predict the performance of the machine and the possibility that mesons could be produced, Kerst answered, "To ask what we expect is like asking what's around a corner that we've never gone around before." Two days after the unveiling the super-betatron fulfilled all hopes and produced what has been described as "torrents of mesons." In order to understand just what the invention of the betatron means, we need to know exactly what a meson is. What we know about it is rather slim, as a matter of fact, and what we hope to learn with the help of the super-betatron is of vital importance. The meson is the fourth basic particle of subatomic matter (the other three are the proton, the neutron and the electron). It is believed to be the binding force that holds all nuclei together. Heretofore mesons have been studied by means of high-altitude balloons with special photographic apparatus to record their passage once they've been split from the nuclei in the earth's atmosphere by incoming cosmic rays. The force necessary to split the mesons from the nuclei has up until now been unattainable anywhere but at this high altitude. The program of improving the betatron and making it an even more useful tool than the present model goes right on, with Dr. Donald Kerst working at it full time. The blue-eyed, brown-haired man of science has little time for leisure ; he feels that there is too much left undone in this particular field. His wife Dorothy and his young son and daughter know that the one way to get Dad's nose off the grindstone is to suggest a family canoeing or skiing excursion. These are his favorite recreations. "As long as the water holds out and the snow stays, we know we can have him around with us," says Mrs. Kerst, "but you can't stop him from mulling things over even then. He's what you might call 'wrapped up in his work'." -- epw Does your wife call you Pumpkinhead? Well, maybe it's not an insult; it might be a pet name. Ah -- but whose pet name? By Russell Burton dusk-darkened Jersey meadows, Ronald Lovegear, fourteen years with Allied Electronix, embraced his burden with both arms, silently cursing the engineer who was deliberately rocking the train. In his thin chest he nursed the conviction that someday there would be an intelligent robot at the throttle of the #:# to Philadelphia. He carefully moved one hand and took a notebook from his pocket. That would be a good thing to mention at the office next Monday. Again he congratulated himself for having induced his superiors to let him take home the company's most highly developed mechanism to date. He had already forgiven himself for the little white lie that morning. "Pascal," he had told them, "is a little weak on square roots." That had done it! Old Hardwick would never permit an Allied computer to hit the market that was not the absolute master of square roots. If Lovegear wanted to work on Pascal on his own time it was fine with the boss. Ronald Lovegear consulted his watch. He wondered if his wife would be on time. He had told Corinne twice over the phone to bring the station wagon to met him. But she had been so forgetful lately. It was probably the new house; six rooms to keep up without a maid was quite a chore. His pale eyes blinked. He had a few ideas along that line too. He smiled and gave the crate a gentle pat. and she had brought the station wagon. Lovegear managed to get the crate to the stairs of the coach where he consented to the assistance of a porter. "It's not really heavy," he told Corinne as he and the porter waddied through the crowd. "Actually only # pounds, four ounces. Aluminum casing, you know;..." "No, I didn't..." began Corinne. "But it's delicate," he continued. "If I should drop this... He shuddered. After the crate had been placed lengthwise in the rear of the station wagon, Corinne watched Ronald tuck a blanket around it. "It's not very cold, Ronald." "I don't want it to get bounced around," he said. "Now, please, Corinne, do drive carefully." Not until she had driven half a block did he kiss her on the cheek. Then he glanced anxiously over his shoulder at the rear seat. Once he thought Corinne hit a rut that could have been avoided. Long after Corinne had retired that night she heard Ronald pounding with a brass hammer down in his den. At first she had insisted he take the crate out to his workshop. He looked at her with scientific aloofness and asked if she had the slightest conception of what "this is worth?" She hadn't, and she went to bed. It was only another one of his gestures which was responsible for these weird dreams. That night she dreamed Ronald brought home a giant octopus which insisted on doing the dishes for her. In the morning she woke up feeling unwanted. Downstairs Ronald had already put on the coffee. He was wearing his robe and the pinched greyness of his face told Corinne he had been up half the night. He poured coffee for her, smiling wanly. "If I have any commitments today, Corinne, will you please see that they are taken care of?" "But you were supposed to get the wallpaper for the guest room..." "I know, I know, dear. But time is so short. They might want Pascal back any day. For the next week or two I shall want to devote most of my time..." "Pascal?" "Yes. The machine -- the computer." He smiled at her ignorance. "We usually name the expensive jobs. You see, a computer of this nature is really the heart and soul of the mechanical man we will construct." Corinne didn't see, but in a few minutes she strolled toward the den, balancing her coffee in both hands. With one elbow she eased the door open. There it was: an innocent polished cabinet reaching up to her shoulders. Ronald had removed one of the plates from its side and she peeped into the section where the heart and soul might be located. She saw only an unanatomical array of vacuum tubes and electrical relays. She felt Ronald at her back. "It looks like the inside of a juke box," she said. He beamed. "The same relay systems used in the simple juke box are incorporated in a computer." He placed one hand lovingly on the top of the cabinet. "But, Ronald -- it doesn't even resemble a -- a mechanical man?" "That's because it doesn't have any appendages as yet. You know, arms and legs. That's a relatively simple adjustment." He winked at Corinne with a great air of complicity. "And I have some excellent ideas along that line. Now, run along, because I'll be busy most of the day." spent most of the day shopping for week-end necessities. On an irrational last-minute impulse -- perhaps an unconscious surrender to the machine age -- she dug in the grocery deep freeze and brought out a couple of purple steaks. That evening she had to call Ronald three times for dinner, and when he came out of the den she noticed that he closed the door the way one does upon a small child. He chattered about inconsequential matters all through dinner. Corinne knew that his work was going smoothly. A few minutes later she was to know how smoothly. It started when she began to put on her apron to do the dishes. "Let that go for now, dear," Ronald said, taking the apron from her. He went into the den, returning with a small black box covered with push buttons. "Now observe carefully," he said, his voice pitched high. He pushed one of the buttons, waited a second with his ear cocked toward the den, then pushed another. Corinne heard the turning of metal against metal, and she slowly turned her head. "Oh!" She suppressed a shriek, clutching Ronald's arm so tightly he almost dropped the control box. Pascal was walking under his own effort, considerably taller now with the round, aluminum legs Ronald had given him. Two metal arms also hung at the sides of the cabinet. One of these raised stiffly, as though for balance. Corinne's mouth opened as she watched the creature jerk awkwardly across the living room. "Oh, Ronald! The fishbowl!" Ronald stabbed knowingly at several buttons. Pascal pivoted toward them, but not before his right arm swung out and, almost contemptuously, brushed the fishbowl to the floor. Corinne closed her eyes at the crash. Then she scooped up several little golden bodies and rushed for the kitchen. When she returned Ronald was picking up pieces of glass and dabbing at the pool of water with one of her bathroom towels. Pascal, magnificently aloof, was standing in the center of the mess. "I'm sorry." Ronald looked up. "It was my fault. I got confused on the buttons." But Corinne's glances toward the rigid Pascal held no indictment. She was only mystified. There was something wrong here. "But Ronald, he's so ugly without a head. I thought that all robots -- " "Oh, no," he explained, "we would put heads on them for display purposes only. Admittedly that captures the imagination of the public. That little adapter shaft at the top could be the neck, of course..." He waved Corinne aside and continued his experiments with the home-made robot. Pascal moved in controlled spasms around the living room. Once, he walked just a little too close to the floor-length window -- and Corinne stood up nervously. But Ronald apparently had mastered the little black box. With complete confidence Corinne went into the kitchen to do the dishes. Not until she was elbow deep in suds did she recall her dreams about the octopus. She looked over her shoulder, and the curious, unwanted feeling came again. T he following afternoon -- after Ronald had cancelled their Sunday drive into the country -- Pascal, with constant exhortations by Ronald at the black box, succeeded in vacuum cleaning the entire living room. Ronald was ecstatic. "Now do you understand?" he asked Corinne. "A mechanical servant! Think of it! Of course mass production may be years away, but..." "Everyone will have Thursday nights off," said Corinne -- but Ronald was already jabbing at buttons as Pascal dragged the vacuum cleaner back to its niche in the closet. Later, Corinne persuaded Ronald to take her to a movie, but not until the last moment was she certain that Pascal wasn't going to drag along. Every afternoon of the following week Ronald Lovegear called from the laboratory in New York to ask how Pascal was getting along. "Just fine," Corinne told him on Thursday afternoon, "But he certainly ruined some of the tomato plants in the garden. He just doesn't seem to hoe in a straight line. Are you certain it's the green button I push?" "It's probably one of the pressure regulators," interrupted Ronald. "I'll check it when I get home." Corinne suspected by his lowered voice that Mr. Hardwick had walked into the lab. That night Pascal successfully washed and dried the dishes, cracking only one cup in the process. Corinne spent the rest of the evening sitting in the far corner of the living room, thumbing the pages of a magazine. On the following afternoon -- prompted perhaps by that perverse female trait which demands completion of all projects once started -- Corinne lingered for several minutes in the vegetable department at the grocery. She finally picked out a fresh, round and blushing pumpkin. Later in her kitchen, humming a little tune under her breath, Corinne deftly maneuvered a paring knife to transform the pumpkin into a very reasonable facsimile of a man's head. She placed the pumpkin over the tiny shaft between Pascal's box-shaped shoulders and stepped back. She smiled at the moon-faced idiot grinning back at her. He was complete, and not bad-looking! But just before she touched the red button once and the blue button twice -- which sent Pascal stumbling out, to the backyard to finish weeding the circle of pansies before dinner -- she wondered about the gash that was his mouth. She distinctly remembered carving it so that the ends curved upward into a frozen and quite harmless smile. But one end of the toothless grin seemed to sag a little, like the cynical smile of one who knows his powers have been underestimated. Corinne would not have had to worry about her husband's reaction to the new vegetable-topped Pascal. Ronald accepted the transformation good-naturedly, thinking that a little levity, once in a while, was a good thing. "And after all," said Corinne later that evening, "I'm the one who has to spend all day in the house with..." She lowered her voice : "With Pascal." But Ronald wasn't listening. He retired to his den to finish the plans for the mass production of competent mechanical men. One for every home in America... He fell asleep with the thought. the next two weeks going through pretty much the same routine. He, methodically jolting through the household chores; she, walking aimlessly from room to room, smoking too many cigarettes. She began to think of Pascal as a boarder. Strange -- at first he had been responsible for that unwanted feeling. But now his helpfulness around the house had lightened her burden. And he was so cheerful all the time! After living with Ronald's preoccupied frown for seven years... After luncheon one day, when Pascal neglected to shut off the garden hose, she caught herself scolding him as if he were human. Was that a shadow from the curtain waving in the breeze, or did she see a hurt look flit across the mouth of the pumpkin? Corinne put out her hand and patted Pascal's cylindrical wrist. It was warm -- flesh warm. She hurried upstairs and stood breathing heavily with her back to the door. A little later she thought she heard someone -- someone with a heavy step -- moving around downstairs. "I left the control box down there," she thought. "Of course, it's absurd..." At four o'clock she went slowly down the stairs to start Ronald's dinner. Pascal was standing by the refrigerator, exactly where she had left him. Not until she had started to peel the potatoes did she notice the little bouquet of pansies in the center of the table. Corinne felt she needed a strong cup of tea. She put the water on and placed a cup on the kitchen table. Not until she was going to sit down did she decide that perhaps Pascal should be in the other room. She pressed the red button, the one which should turn him around, and the blue button, which should make him walk into the living room. She heard the little buzz of mechanical life as Pascal began to move. But he did not go into the other room ! He was holding a chair for her, and she sat down rather heavily. A sudden rush of pleasure reddened her cheeks. Not since sorority days... Before Pascal's arms moved away she touched his wrist again, softly, only this time her hand lingered. And his wrist was warm! VV Pascal back at the lab?" she asked Ronald at dinner that evening, trying tJ keep her voice casual. Ronald smiled. "I think I might have him indefinitely, dear. I've got Hardwick convinced I'm working on something revolutionary." He stopped. "Oh, Corinne! You've spilled coffee all over yourself." The following night Ronald was late in getting home from work. It was raining outside the Newark station and the cabs deliberately evaded him. He finally caught a bus, which deposited him one block from his house. He cut through the back alley, hurrying through the rain. Just before he started up the stairs he glanced through the lighted kitchen window. He stopped, gripping the railing for support. In the living room were Pascal and Corinne. Pascal was reclining leisurely in the fireside chair; Corinne was standing in front of him. It was the expression onher face which stopped Ronald Lovegear. The look was a compound of restraint and compulsion, the reflection of some deep struggle in Corinne's soul. Then she suddenly leaned forward and pressed her lips to Pascal's full, fleshy pumpkin mouth. Slowly, one of Pascal's aluminum arms moved up and encircled her waist. Mr. Lovegear stepped back into the rain. He stood there for several minutes. The rain curled around the brim of his hat, dropped to his face, and rolled down his cheeks with the slow agitation of tears. When, finally, he walked around to the front and stamped heavily up the stairs, Corinne greeted him with a flush in her cheeks. Ronald told her that he didn't feel "quite up to dinner. Just coffee, please." When it was ready he sipped slowly, watching Corinne's figure as she moved around the room. She avoided looking at the aluminum figure in the chair. Ronald put his coffee down, walked over to Pascal, and, gripping him behind the shoulders, dragged him into the den. Corinne stood looking at the closed door and listened to the furious pounding. came out and went straight to the phone. "Yes! Immediately!" he told the man at the freight office. While he sat there waiting Corinne walked upstairs. Ronald did not offer to help the freight men drag the box outside. When they had gone he went into the den and came back with the pumpkin. He opened the back door and hurled it out into the rain. It cleared the back fence and rolled down the alley stopping in a small puddle in the cinders. After a while the water level reached the mouth and there was a soft choking sound. The boy who found it the next morning looked at the mouth and wondered why anyone would carve such, a sad JackO'-Lantern. One Mysfeiy -- Still Unsolved sist of protons, positrons, mesons and heavy nuclei -- are particles that are speeded up in space to velocities that almost equal the speed of light. These tiny pieces hit the Earth constantly at treof times greater than scientists can obtain with even the most modern types of equipment. Despite the consistent and concentrated study being made by scientists, cosmic rays remain a mystery. How they accelerate to their tremendous speeds -- their nature and where they come from and their purpose -- these are still unknown. The cosmic rays that shoot in from space are called primary radiation, and these hardly ever penetrate Earth's atmosphere to sea level. They usually hit atoms of gases that make up the air, invariably smashing the atom and sending its particles -- which are called secondary cosmic rays -- off in many different directions. Actually, in order to make a complete study of the primary cosmic rays under perfect conditions, we should have a laboratory at least # miles above Earth. That's about where the original particles can be found. But since that isn't possible -- at this time anyway -- Navy scientists send up balloons containing various sensitive equipment. Then, the primary rays shoot into the equipment leaving tracks on the photographic plates for later correlation by the scientists. Other equipment radios data to the men on the ground when a cosmic ray is detected. Rockets which can be sent that distance into the atmosphere don't serve the purpose because they can't stay up very long, and this type of project requires high altitudes for hours. Balloons, JFor this reason, have been found to bring much more successful results. With continued research and study, the mystery of the cosmic ray will undoubtedly unfold and science will be able to build the solution into another advance for the good of humanity. We Should Have Stayed Prehistoric rats and wild rats of the same family indicates a definite pattern of physiological and behavior differences between the two types. Which would lead to the idea that these same types of differences possibly e.xist between early prehistoric man and civilized man as we know him today. Man was probably made much more susceptible to various diseases by the very process of becoming civilized. Illnesses like certain forms of colitis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, some forms of cancer, some types of mental illnesses -- all these may be the products that developed as the civilization grew. Quite possibly, as man developed from the state of a hard-fighting primitive to that of a domestic secure individual, certain changes happened to his adrenal glands and his sex glands which could have been great enough to make him an easier victim to certain types of ailments. Maybe he should have stayed a healthy prehistoric... Youth for the Old recently performed some experiments the results of which are worthy of noting. They removed some skin from the ear of a rabbit and impregnated it with glycerine. Then they froze it and kept it stored for four months, after which time they transplanted the skin and found it would grow normally. According to the two scientists -- awar -- it is not too far-fetched to assume that these pieces of skin would have remained in storage, in perfect condition, for a period much longer than the normal expected life span of their donor. If this is so, then the aches and pains of old age vill soon be over -- the possibility of perpetuating youth is probable. A man might store, for example, some pieces of his own arteries and veins. In his old age, when he is suffering from hardening of the arteries, all he'd have to do would be to replace some of his hardened arteries with those belonging to his youth. And, for the vain, no more wrinkled skin! Just store some tissues when you're #, pick them up and let them grow again with you when you're #. It's an interesting possibility. The freeze method, incidentally, is an acknowledged advantage over the fresh bank method since it has been found that freeze grafts heal faster and there is less danger of hemorrhaging. The frozen graft retains its potency. Man Makes Himself Deaf T here is no sound in nature that will do any damage to the ear drums of a human. But man has set out to master nature. And in his efforts to do so, he exposes the human ear to degrees of sound for which it was never intended, and against which it has no protection. In industry, the excessive noises of the machinery with which the worker is associated eight hours of the day create an injury to the hearing organ. The explosions of grenades and gunfire, the violent sounds made by airplane motors and jet engines and all the other instruments of warfare, all contribute their share. Even day-to-day city life as we know it contains an unnatural amount of loud and violent noise. In his effort to become master, man is slowly destroying bits of himself. -- Peter Dakin The line between noble dreams and madness is thin, and loneliness can push men past it... the lonely ones By Edward W, Ludwig onward through cold, silent infinity, on and on, an insignificant pencil of silver lost in the terrible, brooding blackness. But even more awful than the blackness was the loneliness of the six men who inhabited the silver rocket. They moved in loneliness as fish move in water. Their lives revolved in loneliness as planets revolve in space and time. They bore their loneliness like a shroud, and it was as much a part of them as sight in their eyes. Loneliness was both their brother and their god. Yet, like a tiny flame in the darkness, there was hope, a savage, desperate hope that grew with the passing of each day, each month, and each year. And at last... , "Lord," breathed Captain Sam Wiley. Lieutenant Gunderson nodded. "It's a big one, isn't it?" "It's a big one," repeated Captain Wiley. They stared at the image in the Wanderedi forward visi-screen, at the great, shining gray ball. They stared hard, for it w'as like an enchanted, God-given fruit handed them on a star-flecked platter of midnight. It was like the answer to a thousand prayers, a shining symbol of hope which could mean the end of loneliness. "It's ten times as big as Earth," mused Lieutenant Gunderson. "Do you think this'll be it. Captain?" "I'm afraid to think."  A thoughtful silence. "Captain." "Yes?" "Do you hear my heart pounding?" Captain Wiley smiled. "No. No, of course not." "It seems like everybody should be hearing it. But we shouldn't get excited, should we? We mustn't hope too hard." He bit his lip. "But there should be life there, don't you think, Captain?" "There may be." "Nine years, Captain. Think of it. It's taken us nine years to get here. There's got to be life." "Prepare for deceleration, Lieutenant." Lieutenant Gunderson's tall, slim body sagged for an instant. Then his eyes brightened. "Yes, sir!" ued to stare at the beautiful gray globe in the visi-screen. He was not like Gunderson, with boyish eagerness and anxiety flowing out of him in a ceaseless babble. His emotion was as great, or greater, but it was imprisoned within him, like swirling, foaming liquid inside a corked jug. It wouldn't do to encourage the men too much. Because, if they were disappointed... He shook his silver-thatched head. There it was, he thought. A new world. A world that, perhaps, held life. Life. It was a word uttered only with reverence, for throughout the Solar System, with the exception of on Earth, there had been only death. First it was the Moon, airless and lifeless. That had been expected, of course. But Mars. For centuries men had dreamed of Mars and written of Mars with its canals and dead cities, with its ancient men and strange animals. Everyone knew there was or had been life on Mars. The flaming rockets reached Mars, and the canals became volcanic crevices, and the dead cities became jagged peaks of red stone, and the endless sands were smooth, smooth, smooth, untouched by feet of living creatures. There was plant-life, a species of green-red lichen in the Polar regions. But nowhere was there real life. Then Venus, with its dust and wind. No life there. Not even the stars to make one think of home. Only the dust and wind, a dark veil of death screaming eternally over hot dry land. And Jupiter, with its seas of ice; and hot Mercury, a cracked, withered mummy of a planet, baked as hard and dry as an ancient walnut in a furnace. Next, the airless, rocky asteroids, and frozen Saturn with its swirling ammonia snows. And last, the white, silent worlds, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. World after world, all dead, with no sign of life, no reminder of life, and no promise of life. Thus the loneliness had grown. It was not a child of Earth. It was not born in the hearts of those who scurried along city pavements or of those in the green fields or of those in the cool, clean houses. It was a child of the incredible distances, of the infinite night, of emptiness and silence. It was born in the hearts of the slit-eyed men, the oldish young men, tlie spacemen. For without life on other worlds, where was the sky's challenge? Why go on and on to discover only worlds of death? The dream of the spacemen turned from the planets to the stars. Somewhere in the galaxy or in other galaxies there had to be life. Life was a wonderful and precious thing. It wasn't right that it should be confined to a single, tiny planet. If it were, then life would seem meaningless. Mankind would be a freak, a cosmic accident. And now the Wanderer was on the first interstellar flight, hurtling through the dark spaces to Proxima Centauri. Moving silently, as if motionless, yet at a speed of # miles a second. And ahead loomed the great, gray planet, the only planet of the sun, growing larger, larger, each instant... filled the ship. The indicator lights on the control panel glowed like a swarm of pink eyes. "Deceleration compensator adjusted for # G's, sir," reported Lieutenant Gunderson. Captain Wiley nodded, still studying the image of the planet. "There -- there's something else. Captain." "Yes?" "It's Brown, sir. He's drunk." Captain Wiley turned, a scowl on his hard, lined face. "Drunk? Where'd he get the stuff?" "He saved it, sir, saved it for nine years. Said he was going to drink it when we discovered life." "We haven't discovered life yet." "I know. He said he wouldn't set foot on the planet if he was sober. Said if there isn't life there, he couldn't take it -- unless he was drunk." Captain Wiley grunted. "All right." They looked at the world. "Wouldn't it be wonderful. Captain? Just think -- to meet another race. It wouldn't matter what they were like, would it? If they were primitive, we could teach them things. If they were ahead of us, they could teach us. You know what I'd like? To have someone meet us, to gather around us. It wouldn't matter if they were afraid of us or even if they tried to kill us. We'd know that we aren't alone." "I know what you mean," said Captain Wiley. Some of his emotion overflowed the prison of his body. "There's no thrill in landing on dead worlds. If no one's there to see you, you don't feel like a hero." "That's it. Captain! That's why I came on this crazy trip. I guess that's why we all came. I..." Captain Wiley cleared his throat. "Lieutenant, commence deceleration. # G's." "Yes, sir!" the entire visi-screen. Someone coughed behind Captain Wiley. "Sir, the men would like to look at the screen. They can't see the planet out of the ports yet." The speaker was Doyle, the ship's Engineer, a dry, tight-skinned little man. "Sure." Captain Wiley stepped aside. Doyle looked, then Parker and Fong. Just three of them, for Watkins had sliced his wrists the fourth year out. And Brown was drunk. As they looked, a realization came to Captain Wiley. The men were getting old. The years had passed so gradually that he'd never really noticed it before. Lieutenant Gunderson had been a kid just out of Space Academy. Parker and Doyle and Fong, too, had been in their twenties. They had been boys. And now something was gone -- the sharp eyes and sure movements of youth, the smooth skin and thick, soft hair. Now they had become men. And yet for a few moments, as they gazed at the screen, they seemed like happy, expectant children. "I wish Brown could see this," Doyle murmured. "He says now he isn't going to get off his couch till we land and discover life. Says he won't dare look for himself." "The planet's right for life," said Fong, the dark-faced astro-physicist. "Atmosphere forty per cent oxygen, lots of water vapor. No poisonous gases, according to spectroscopic analyses. It should be ideal for life." "There is life there," said Parker, the radarman. "You know why? Because we've given up eighteen years of our lives. Nine years to get here, nine to get back. I'm thirty now. I was twenty-one when we left Earth. I gave up all those good years. They say that you can have something if you pay enough for it. Well, we've paid for this. There has to be #i -- a sort of universal justice. That's why I know there's life here, life that moves and thinks -- maybe even life we can talk to." "You need a drink," said Fong. "It's getting bigger," murmured Lieutenant Gunderson. "The Centaurians," mused Doyle, half to himself. "What'll they be like? Monsters or men? If Parker's right about universal justice, they'll be men." "Hey, where there's men, there's women!" yelled Parker. "A Centaurian woman! Say!" "Look at those clouds!" exclaimed Doyle. "Damn it, we can't see the surface." "Hey, there! Look there, to the right! See it? It's silver, down in a hole in the clouds. It's like a city!" "Maybe it's just water." "No, it's a city!" "Bring 'er down. Captain. God, Captain, bring 'er down fast!" "Drag Brown in here! He ought to see this!" "Canlt you bring 'er down faster. Captain?" "Damn it, it  a city!" "Why doesn't someone get Brown?" "Take to your couches, men," said Captain Wiley. "Landing's apt to be a bit bumpy. Better strap yourselves in." D own went the rocket, more slowly now, great plumes of scarlet thundering from its forward braking jets. Down, down into soft, cotton-like clouds, the whiteness sliding silently past the ports. Suddenly, a droning voice : "To those in the ship from the planet called Earth: Please refrain from landing at this moment. You will await landing instructions." Parker leaped off his couch, grasping a stanchion for support. "That voice! It was human!" Captain Wiley's trembling hand moved over the jet-control panel. The ship slowed in its descent. The clouds outside the portholes became motionless, a milky whiteness pressed against the ship. "The voice!" Parker cried again. "Am I crazy? Did everyone hear it?" Captain Wiley turned away from the panel. "We heard it, Parker. It was in our minds. Telepathy." He smiled. "Yes, the planet is inhabited. There are intelligent beings on it. Perhaps they're more intelligent than we are." It was strange. The men had hoped, dreamed, prayed for this moment. Now they sat stunned, unable to comprehend, their tongues frozen. "We'll see them very soon," said Captain Wiley, his voice quivering. "We'll wait for their directions." Breathlessly, they waited. Captain Wiley's fingers drummed nervously on the base of the control panel. Lieutenant Gunderson rose from his couch, stood in the center of the cabin, then returned to his couch. Silence, save for the constant, rumbling roar of the jets which held the ship aloft. "I wonder how long it'll be," murmured Fong at last. "It seems like a long time!" burst Parker. "We've waited nine years," said Captain Wiley. "We can wait a few more minutes." They waited. "Good Lord!" said Parker. "How long is it going to be? What time is it? We've been waiting an hour ! What kind of people are they down there?" "Maybe they've forgotten about us," said Fong. "That's it!" cried Parker. "They've forgotten about us! Hey, you! Down there -- you that talked to us! We're still here, damn it! We want to land!" "Parker," said Captain Wiley,  sternly. Parker sat down on his couch, his lips quivering. Then came the voice: "We regret that a landing is impossible at this moment. Our field is overcrowded, and your vessel is without priority. You must wait your turn." Captain Wiley stared forward at nothing. "Whoever you are," he whispered, "please understand that we have come a long way to reach your planet. Our trip..." "We do not wish to discuss your trip. You will be notified when landing space is available." Captain Wiley's body shook. "Wait, tell us who you are. What do you look like? Tell us..." "Talking to you is quite difficult. We must form our thoughts so as to form word-patterns in your minds. You will be notified." "Wait a minute!" called Captain Wiley. No answer. Captain Wiley straightened in an effort to maintain dignity. They waited... The darkness was an impenetrable blanket, a solid thing, like thick black velvet glued over the ports. It was worse than the darkness of space. Captain Wiley sat before the control panel, slowly beating his fists against the arms of his chair, a human metronome ticking off the slow seconds. Parker stood before a porthole. "Hey, look. Captain! There's a streak of red, like a meteor. And there's another!" Captain Wiley rose, looked out. "They're rockets. They're going to land. These people are highly advanced." His face became grim. Below them lay a planet, an intelligent race hidden beneath clouds and darkness. What manner of creatures were they? How great was their civilization? What marvelous secrets had their scientists discovered? What was their food like, their women, their whiskey? The questions darted endlessly through his mind like teasing needle-points. All these wondrous things lay below them, and here they sat, like starving men, their hands tied, gazing upon a steaming but unobtainable dinner. So near and yet so far. He trembled. The emotion grew within him until it burst out as water bursts through the cracked wall of a dam. He became like Parker. "Why should we wait?" he yelled. "Why must we land in their field? Parker! Prepare to release flares! We're going down! We'll land anywhere -- in a street, in the country. We don't have to wait for orders!" Parker bounced off his couch. Someone called, "Brown, we're going to landl" A scurrying of feet, the rush of taut-muscled bodies, the babble of excited voices. "We're going down!" "We're going down!" The grumble of the Wanderer's jets loudened, softened, spluttered, loudened again. Vibration filled the ship as it sank downward. Suddenly it lurched upward, like a child's ball caught in a stream of rising water. The jolt staggered the men. They seized stanchions and bulkhead railings to keep their balance. "What the hell?" Abruptly, the strange movement ceased. The ship seemed motionless. There was no vibration. "Captain," said Lieutenant Gunderson. "There's no change in altitude. We're still at # feet, no more, no less." "We must be going down," said Captain Wiley, puzzled. "Kill jets # and #." The Lieutenant's hands flicked off two switches. A moment later: "There's no change. Captain." Then came the voice: "To those in the vessel from the planet Earth ; Please do not oppose orders of the Landing Council. You are the first visitors in the history of our world whom we have had to restrain with physical force. You will be notified when landing space is available." The warm sunlight streamed into the clouds, washing away the last shadows and filtering through the portholes. The men breakfasted, bathed, shaved, smoked, sat, twisted their fingers, looked out the ports. They were silent men, with dark shadows about their eyes and with tight. white-lipped mouths. Frequently, the clouds near them were cut by swift, dark shapes swooping downward. The shapes were indistinct in the cotton-like whiteness, but obviously they were huge, like a dozen Wanderers made into one. "Those ships are big," someone murmured, without enthusiasm. "It's a busy spaceport," grumbled Captain Wiley. Thoughts, words, movements came so slowly it was like walking under water. Enthusiasm was dead. The men were automatons, sitting, waiting, eating, sitting, waiting. A day passed, and a night. "Maybe they've forgotten us," said Fong. No one answered. The thought had been voiced before, a hundred times. Then, at last, the droning words; "To those in the vessel from the planet Earth: You will now land. We will carry you directly over the field. Then you will descend straight down. The atmosphere is suitable to your type of life and is free of germs. You will not need protection." The men stared at one another. "Hey," Doyle said, "did you hear that? He says we can go down." The men blinked. Captain Wiley swallowed hard. He rose with a stiff, slow, nervous hesitancy. "We're going down," he mumbled, as if repeating the words over and over in his mind and trying to believe them. The men stirred as realization sprouted and grew. They stirred like lethargic animals aroused from the long, dreamless sleep of hibernation. "We're going to land," breathed Parker, unbelievingly. The Wanderer moved as though caught in the grip of a giant, invisible hand. The voice said : "You may now descend." Captain Wiley moved to the jetcontrol panel. "Lieutenant!" he snapped. "Wake up. Let's go!" The ship sank downward through the thick sea of clouds. The men walked to the ports. A tenseness, an excitement grew in their faces, like dying flame being fanned into its Out of the clouds loomed monstrous, shining, silver spires and towers, Cyclopean bridges, gigantic lake-like mirrors, immense golden spheres. It was a nightmare world, a j'ungle of fantastic shape and color. The men gasped, whispered, murmured, the flame of their excitement growing, growing. "The whole planet is a city!" breathed Parker. The Wanderer came to rest on a broad landing field of light blue stone. The jets coughed, spluttered, died. The ship quivered, then lay still, its interior charged with an electric, pregnant silence. "You first. Captain." Lieutenant Gunderson's voice cracked, and his face was flushed. "You be the first to go outside." Captain Wiley stepped through the airlock, his heart pounding. It was over now -- all the bewilderment, the numbness. And his eyes were shining. He'd waited so long that it was hard to believe the waiting was over. But it was, he told himself. The journey was over, and the waiting, and now the loneliness would soon be over. Mankind was not alone. It was a good universe after all! He stepped outside, followed by Lieutenant Gunderson, then by Parker, Doyle and Fong. He rubbed his eyes. This couldn't be! A world like this couldn't exist! He shook his head, blinked furiously"It -- it can't be true," he mumbled to Lieutenant Gunderson. "We're still on the ship -- dreaming." The landing field was huge, perhaps ten miles across, and its sides were lined with incredible ships, the smallest of which seemed forty times as large as the Wanderer. There were silver ships, golden ships, black ships, round ships, transparent ships, cigar-shaped ships, flat-topped ships. And scattered over the field were -- creatures. A few were the size of men, but most were giants by comparison. Some were humanoid, some reptilian. Some were naked, some clad in helmeted suits, some enveloped with a shimmering, water-like luminescence. The creatures walked, slithered, floated, crawled. Beyond the ships and the field lay the great city, its web-work of towers, minarets, spheres and bridges like the peaks of an enormous mountain range stretching up into space itself. The structures were like the colors of a rainbow mixed in a cosmic paint pot, molded and solidified into fantastic shapes by a mad god. "I -- I'm going back to the ship," stammered Parker. The whiteness of death was in his face. "I'm going to stay with Brown." He turned, and then he screamed. "Captain, the ship's moving!" Silently, the Wanderer was drifting to the side of the field. The toneless voice said: "We are removing your vessel so that other descending ships will not damage it." Captain Wiley shouted into the air. "Wait! Don't go away! Help us! Where can we see you?" The voice seemed to hesitate. "It is difficult for us to speak In thoughts that you understand." Captain Wiley studied the faces of his men. They were not faces of conquerors or of triumphant spacemen. They were the faces of dazed, frightened children who had caught a glimpse of Hell. He attempted, feebly, to smile. "All right," he said loudly, "so it isn't like we expected. So no one came to meet us with brass bands and ten cent flags. We've still succeeded, haven't we? We've found life that's intelligent beyond our comprehension. What if our own civilization is insignificant by comparison? Look at those beings. Think of what we can learn from them. Why, their ships might have exceeded the speed of ligjfit. They might be from other galaxies!" "Let's find out," said Parker. They strode to the nearest ship, an immense, smooth, bluish sphere. Two creatures stood before it, shaped like men and yet twice the size of men. They wore white, skintight garments that revealed muscular bodies like those of gods. The looked at Captain Wiley and smiled. One of them pointed toward the Wanderer. Their smiles widened and then they laughed. They laughed gently, understandingly, but they laughed. And then they turned away. "Talk to them," Parker urged. "How?" Beads of perspiration shone on Captain Wiley's face. "Any way. Go ahead." Captain Wiley wiped his forehead. "We are from Earth, the third planet..." The two god-like men seemed annoyed. They walked away, ignoring the Earthmen. Captain Wiley spat. "All right, so they won't talk to us. Look at that city! Think of the things we can see there and tell the folks on Earth about! Why, we'll be heroes!" "Let's go," said Parker, his voice quavering around the edges. They walked toward a large, oval opening in a side of the field, a hole between mountainous, conical structures that seemed like the entrance to a street. Suddenly breath exploded from Captain Wiley's lungs. His body jerked back. He fell to the blue stone pavement. Then he scrambled erect, scowling, his hands outstretched. He felt a soft, rubbery, invisible substance. "It's a wall!" he exclaimed. The voice droned: "To those of Earth: Beings under the #th stage of Galactic Development are restricted to the area of the landing field. We are sorry. In your primitive stage it would be unwise for you to learn the nature of our civilization. Knowledge of our science would be abused by your people, and used for the thing you call war. We hope that you have been inspired by what you have seen. However, neither we nor the other visitors to our planet are permitted to hold contact with you. It is suggested that you and your vessel depart." "Listen, you!" screamed Parker. "We've been nine years getting here! By Heaven, we won't leave now! We're..." "We have no time to discuss the matter. Beings under the #th stage of Galactic..." "Never mind!" spat Captain Wiley. Madness flamed in Parker's eyes. "We won't go! I tell you, we won't, we won't!" His fists streaked through the air as if at an invisible enemy. He ran toward the wall. He collided with a jolt that sent him staggering backward, crying, sobbing, screaming, all at once. Captain Wiley stepped forward, struck him on the chin. Parker crumpled. They stood looking at his body, which lay motionless except for the slow rising and falling of his chest. "What now, Captain?" asked Lieutenant Gunderson. Captain Wiley thought for a few seconds. Then he said, "We're ignorant country bumpkins, Lieutenant, riding into the city in a chugging jalopy. We're stupid savages, trying to discuss the making of fire with the creators of atomic energy. We're children racing a paper glider against an atomic-powered jet. We're too ridiculous to be noticed. We're tolerated -- but nothing more." "Shall we go home?" asked Fong, a weariness in his voice. Lieutenant Gunderson scratched his neck. "I don't think I'd want to go home now. Gould you bear to tell the truth about what happened?" Fong looked wistfully at the shining city. "If we told the truth, they probably wouldn't believe us. We've failed. It sounds crazy. We reached Proxima Gentauri and found life, and yet somehow we failed. No, I wouldn't like to go home." "Still, we learned something," said Doyle. "We know now that there is life on worlds beside our own. Somewhere there must be other races like ours." They looked at each other, strangely, for a long, long moment. At last Lieutenant Gunderson asked, "How far is Alpha Centauri?" Captain Wiley frowned. "Alpha Gentauri?" Through his mind swirled chaotic visions of colossal distances, eternal night, and lonely years. He sought hard to find a seed of hope in his mind, and yet there was no seed. There were only a coldness and an emptiness. Suddenly, the voice: "Yes, Men of Earth, we suggest that you try Alpha Gentauri." The men stood silent and numb, like bewildered children, as the implication of those incredible words sifted into their consciousness. Finally Fong said, "Did -- did you hear that? He said..." Captain Sam Wiley nodded, very slowly. "Yes. Alpha Gentauri. Alpha Gentauri." His eyes began to twinkle, and then he smiled... onward through cold, silent infinity, on and on, an insignificant pencil of silver lost in the terrible, brooding blackness. Yet even greater than the blackness was the flaming hope in the six men who inhabited the silver rocket. They moved in hope as fish move in water. Their lives revolved in hope as planets revolve in space and time. They bore their hope like a jeweled crown, and it was as much a part of them as sight in their eyes. Hope was both their brother and their god. And there was no loneliness. Progress is relative; Senator O'Noonans idea of it was not particularly scientific. Which would be too bad, if he had the last word! Progress Report By Mark Clifton and Alex Apostoiides that the air conditioning unit merely washed the hot air around him without lowering the temperature from that outside. He knew it was partly psychosomatic, compounded of the view of the silvery spire of the test ship through the heatwaves of the Nevada landscape and the knowledge that this was the day, the hour, and the minutes. The final test was at hand. The instrument ship was to be sent out into space, controlled from this sunken concrete bunker, to find out if the flimsy bodies of men could endure there. Jennings visualized other bunkers scattered through the area, observation posts, and farther away the field headquarters with open telephone lines to tlie Pentagon, and beyond that a world waiting for news of the test -- and not everyone wishing it well. The monotonous buzz of the field phone pulled him away from his fascinated gaze at the periscope slit. He glanced at his two assistants. Professor Stein and Major Eddy. They were seated in front of their control boards, staring at .the blank eyes of their radar screens, patiently enduring the beads of sweat on their faces and necks and hands, the odor of it .arising from their bodies. They too were feeling the moment. He picked up the phone. "Jennings," .he said crisply. "Zero minus one half hour, Colonel. We start alert count in fifteen minutes." "Right," Colonel Jennings spoke softly, showing none of the e.xcitement he felt. He replaced the field phone on its hook and spoke to the two men in front of him. "This is it. Apparently this time we'll go through with it." Major Eddy's shoulders hunched a trifle, as if he were getting set to have a load placed upon them. Professor Stein gave no indication that he had heard. His thin body was stooped over his instrument bank, intense, alert, as if he were a runner crouched at the starting mark, as if he were young again. Colonel Jennings walked over to the periscope slit again and peered through the shimmer of heat to where the silvery ship lay arrowed in her cradle. The last few moments of waiting, with a brassy taste in his mouth, with the vision of the test ship before him; these were the worst. Everything had been done, checked and rechecked hours and days ago. He found himself wishing there were some little thing, some desperate little error which must be corrected hurriedly, just something to break the tension of waiting. "You're all right, Sam, Prof?" he asked the major and professor unnecessarily. "A little nervous," Major Eddy answered without moving. "Of course," Professor Stein said. There was a too heavy stress on the silibant sound, as if the last traces of accent had not yet been removed. "I expect everyone is nervous, not just the hundreds involved in this, but everywhere," Jennings commented. And then ruefully, "Except Professor Stein there. I thought surely I'd see some nerves at this point, Prof." He was attempting to make light conversation, something to break the strain of mounting buck fever. "If I let even one nerve tendril slack, Colonel, I would go to pieces entirely," Stein said precisely, in the way a man speaks who has learned the language from text books. "So I do not think of our ship at all. I think of mankind. I wonder if mankind is as ready as our ship. I wonder if man will do any better on the planets than he has done here." "Well, of course," Colonel Jennings answered with sympathy in his voice, "under Hitler and all the things you went through, I don't blame you for being a little bitter. But not all mankind is like that, you know. As long as you've been in our country, Professor, you've never looked around you. You've been working on this, never lifting your head " H e jerked in annoyance as a red light blinked over the emergency circuit, and a buzzing, sharp and repeated, broke into this moment when he felt he was actually reaching, touching Stein, as no one had before. He dragged the phone toward him and began speaking angrily into its mouthpiece before he had brought it to his lips. "What the hell's the matter now? They're not going to call it off again! Three times now, and..." He broke off and frowned as the crackling voice came through the receiver, the vein on his temple pulsing in his stress. "I beg your pardon. General," he said, much more quietly. The two men turned from their radar scopes and watched him questioningly. He shrugged his shoulders, an indication to them of his helplessness. "You're not going to like this, Jim," the general was saying. "But . it's orders from Pentagon. Are you familiar with Senator O'Noonan?" "Vaguely," Jennings answered, "You'll be more familiar with him, Jim. He's been newly appointed chairman of the appropriations committee covering our work. And he's fought it bitterly from the beginning. He's tried every way he could to scrap the entire project. When we've finished this test, Jim, we'll have used up our appropriations to date. Whether we get any more depends on him." "Yes, sir?" Jennings spoke questioningly. Political maneuvering was not his problem, that was between Pentagon and Congress. "We must have his support, Jim," the general explained. "Pentagon hasn't been able to win him over. He's stubborn and violent in his reactions. The fact it keeps him in the headlines -- well, of course that wouldn't have any bearing. So Pentagon invited him to come to the field here to watch the test, hoping that would win him over." The general hesitated, then continued. "I've gone a step farther. I felt if he was actually at the center of control, your operation, he might be won over, if he could actually participate, press the activating key or something, if the headlines could show he was working with us, actually sent the test ship on its flight..." "General, you can't," Jennings moaned. He forgot rank, everything. 'Tve already done it, Jim," the general chose to ignore the outburst. "He's due there now. I'll look to you to handle it. He's got to be won over. Colonel. It's your project." Considering the years that he and the general had worked together, the warm accord and informality between them, the use of Jennings' title made it an order. "Yes, sir," he said. "Over," said the general formally. "Out," whispered Jennings. The two men looked at him questioningly. "It seems," he answered their look, "we are to have an observer. Senator O'Noonan." "Even in Germany," Professor Stein said quietly, "they knew enough to leave us alone at a critical moment." "He can't do it, Jim," Major Eddy looked at Jennings with pleading eyes. "Oh, but he can," Jennings answered bitterly. "Orders. And you know what orders are, don't you, Major?" "Yes, sir," Major Eddy said stiffly. Professor Stein smiled ruefully. Both of them turned back to their instrum.ent boards, their radar screens, to the protective obscurity of subordinates carrying out an assignment. They were no longer three men coming close together, almost understanding one another in this moment of waiting, when the world and all in it had been shut away, and nothing real existed except the silvery spire out there on the desert and the life of it in the controls at their fingertips. "Beep, minus fifteen minutes!" the first time signal sounded. U The senator appeared in the low doorway and extended a fleshy hand. His voice was hearty, but there was no warmth behind his tones. He paused on the threshold, bulky, impressive, as if he were about to deliver an address. But Jennings, while shaking hands, drew him into the bunker, pointedly, causing the senator to raise bushy eyebrows and stare at him speculatively. "At this point everything runs on a split second basis, Senator," he said crisply. "Ceremony comes after the test." His implication was that when the work was done, the senator could have his turn in the limelight, take all the credit, turn it into political fodder to be thrown to the people. But because the man was chairman of the appropriations committee, he softened his abruptness. "If the timing is off even a small fraction. Senator, we would have to scrap the flight and start all over." "At additional expense, no doubt." The senator could also be crisp. "Surprises me that the military should think of that, however." The closing of the heavy doors behind him punctuated his remark and caused him to step to the center of the bunker. Where there had seemed adequate room before, now the feeling was one of oppressive overcrowding. Unconsciously, Major Eddy squared his elbows as if to clear the space around him for the manipulation of his controls. Professor Stein sat at his radar screen, quiet, immobile, a part of the mechanisms. He was accustomed to overbearing authority whatever political tag it might wear at the moment. "Beep. Eleven minutes," the signal sounded. "Perhaps you'll be good enough to brief me on just what you're doing here?" the senator asked, and implied by the tone of his voice that it couldn't be very much. "In layman's language, Colonel. Don't try to make it impressive with technical obscurities. I want my progress report on this project to be understandable to everyone." Jennings looked at him in dismay. Was the man kidding him? Explain the zenith of science, the culmination of the dreams of man in twenty simple words or less! And about ten minutes to win over a man which the Pentagon had failed to win. "Perhaps you'd like to sit here. Senator," be said courteously. "When we learned you were coming, we felt yours should be the honor. At zero time, you press this key -- here. It will be your hand which sends the test ship out into space." Apparently they were safe. The senator knew so little, he did not realize the automatic switch would close with the zero time signal, that no hand could be trusted to press the key at precisely the right time, that the senator's key was a dummy. "Beep, ten," the signal came through. Jennings went back over to the periscope and peered through the slit. He felt strangely surprised to see the silver column of the ship still there. The calm, the scientific detachment, the warm thrill of coordinated effort, all were gone. He felt as if the test flight itself was secondary to what the senator thought about it, what he would say in his progress report. He wondered if the senator's progress report would compare in any particular with the one on the ship. That was a chart, representing as far as they could tell, the minimum and maximum tolerances of human life. If the multiple needles, tracing their continuous lines, went over the black boundaries of tolerances, human beings would die at that point. Such a progress report, showing the life-sustaining conditions at each point throughout the ship's flight, would have some meaning. He wondered what meaning the senator's progress report would have. He felt himself being pushed aside from the periscope. There was no ungentleness in the push, simply the determined pressure of an arrogant man who was accustomed to being in the center of things, and thinking nothing of shoving to get there. The senator gave him the briefest of explanatory looks, and placed his own eye at the periscope slit. "Beep, nine," the signal sounded. "So that's what represents two contemptuously. "That little sliver of metal." bomb was even smaller," Jennings said quietly. T he senator took his eye away from the periscope briefly and looked at Jennings speculatively. "The story of where all that money went still hasn't been told, he said pointedly. "But the story of will be different." Colonel Jennings said nothing. The white hot rage mounting within him made it impossible for him to speak. The senator straightened up and walked back over to his chair. He waved a hand in the direction of Major Eddy. "What does that man do?" he asked, as if the major were not present, or was unable to comprehend. "Major Eddy," Jennings found control of his voice, "operates remote control." He was trying to reduce the vast complexity of the operation to the simplest possible language. "Beep, eight," the signal interrupted him. "He will guide the ship throughout its entire flight, just as if he were sitting in it." "Why isn't he sitting in it?" the senator asked. "That's what the test is for. Senator." Jennings felt his voice becoming icy. "We don't know if space will permit human life. We don't know what's out there." "Best way to find out is for a man to go out there and see," the senator commented shortly. "I want to find out something, I go look at it myself. I don't depend on charts and graphs, and folderol." The major did not even hunch his broad shoulders, a characteristic gesture, to show that he had heard, to show that he wished the senator was out there in untested space. "What about him? He's not even in uniform!" "Professor Stein maintains sight contact on the scope and transmits The senator's eyes flashed again beneath heavy brows. His lips indicated what he thought of professors and projects who used them. The colonel looked at him incredulously. It was on the tip of his tongue to ask where the man had been during the war. He decided he'd better not ask it. He might learn. "It stands for Identification -- Friend or Foe, Senator. It's army jargon." "Beep, seven." Seven minutes, Jennings thought, and here I am trying to explain the culmination of the entire science of all mankind to a lardbrain in simple kindergarten words. Well, he'd wished there was something to break the tension of the last half hour, keep him occupied. He had it. "You mean the army wouldn't know, after the ship got up, whether it was ours or the enemy's?" the senator asked incredulously. "There are meteors in space. Senator," Jennings said carefully. "Radar contact is all we'll have out verts our beam to a predetermined pulse, and it bounces back to us in a different pattern. That's the only way we'd know if we were still on the ship, or have by chance fastened on to a meteor." "What has that got to do with the enemy?" O'Noonan asked uncomprehendingly. Jennings sighed, almost audibly. "The mechanism was developed during the war, when we didn't know which planes were ours and which the enemy's. We've simply adapted it to this use -- to save money. Senator." "Humph!" the senator expressed his disbelief. "Top complicated. The world has grown too complicated." "Beep, six." The senator glanced irritably at the time speaker. It had interrupted his speech. But he chose to ignore the interruption, that was the way to handle heckling. "I am a simple man. I come from simple parentage. I represent the simple people, the common people, the people with their feet on the ground. And the whole world needs to get back to the simple truths and honesties..." Jennings headed off the campaign speech which might appeal to the mountaineers of the senator's home state, where a man's accomplishments were judged by how far he could spit tobacco juice; it had little application in this bunker where the final test before the flight of man to the stars was being tried. "To us. Senator," he said gently, "this ship represents simple truths and honesties. We are, at this moment, testing the truths of all that mankind has ever thought of, theorized about, believed of the space which surrounds the Earth. A farmer may hear about new methods of growing crops, but the only way he knows whether they're practical or not is to try them on his own land." The senator looked at him impassively. Jennings didn't know whether he was going over or not. But he was trying. "All that ship, and all the instruments it contains; those represent the utmost honesties of the men who worked on them. Nobody tried to bluff, to get by with shoddy workmanship, cover up ignorance. A farmer does not try to bluff his land, for the crops he gets tells the final story. Scientists, too, have simple honesty. They have to have, Senator, for the results will show them up if they don't." T he senator looked at him speculatively, and with a growing respect. Not a bad speech, that. Not a bad speech at all. If this tomfoolery actually worked, and it might, that could be the approach in selling it to his constituents. By implication, he could take full credit, put over the impression that it was he who had stood over the scientists making sure they were as honest and simple as the mountain farmers. Many a man has gone into the White House with less. "Beep, five." Five more minutes. The sudden thought occurred to O'Noonan: what if he refused to press the dummy key? Refused to take part in this project he called tomfoolery? Perhaps they thought they were being clever in having him take part in the ship's launching, and were by that act committing him to something... "This is the final test, Senator. After this one, if it is right, man leaps to the stars!" It was Jennings' plea, his final attempt to catch the senator up in the fire and the dream. "And then more yapping colonists wanting statehood," the senator said dryly. "Upsetting the balance of power. Changing things." Jennings was silent. "Beep, four." "More imports trying to get into our country duty-free," O'Noonan went on. "Upsetting our economy." His vision was of lobbyists threatening to cut off contributions if their own industries were not kept in a favorable position. Of grimjawed industrialists who could easily put a more tractable candidate up in his place to be elected by the free and thinking people of his state. All the best catch phrases, the semantically-loaded promises, the advertising appropriations being used by his opponent. It was a dilemma. Should he jump on the bandwagon of advancement to the stars, hoping to catch the imagination of the voters by it? Were the voters really in favor of progress? What could this space flight put in the dinner pails of the Smiths, the Browns, the Johnsons? It was all very well to talk about the progress of mankind, but that was the only measure to be considered. Any politician knew that. And apparently no scientist knew it. Man advances only when he sees how it will help him stuff his gut. "Beep, three." For a full minute, the senator had sat lost in speculation. And what could he personally gain? A plan, full-formed, sprang into his mind. This whole ded could be taken out of the hands of no the military on charges of waste and corruption. It could be brought back into the control of private industry, where it belonged. He thought of vast tracts of land in his own state, tracts he could buy cheap, through dummy companies, places which could be made very suitable for the giant factories necessary to manufacture spaceships. As chairman of the appropriations committee, it wouldn't be difficult to sway the choice of site. And all that extra employment for the people of his own state. The voters couldn't forget plain, simple, honest O'Noonan after that! "Beep, two." beads increase on his forehead. His collar was already soaking wet. He had been watching the senator through two long minutes, terrible eon-consuming minutes, the impassive face showing only what the senator wanted it to show. He saw the face now soften into something approaching benignity, nobility. The head came up, the silvery hair tossed back. "Son," he said with a ringing thrill in his voice. "Mankind much reach the stars! We must allow nothing to stop that! No personal consideration, no personal belief, nothing must stand in the way of mankind's greatest dream!" His eyes were shrewdly watching the effect upon Jennings' face, ; measuring through him the effect such a speech would have upon the voters. He saw the relief spread over Jennings' face, the glow. Yes, it might work. "Now, son," he said with kindly tolerance, "tell me what you want me to do about pressing this key when the time comes." "Beep, one." And then the continuous drone while the seconds were being counted off aloud. "Fifty-nine, fifty-eight, fiftyseven -- " The droning went on while Jennings showed the senator just how to press the dummy key down, explaining it in careful detail, and just when. "Thirty-seven, thirty-six, thirtyfive -- " "Major!" Jennings called questioningly. "Ready, sir." "Professor!" "Ready, sir." "Press it. Senator!" Jennings called frantically. Already the automatic firing stud had taken over. The bellowing, roaring flames reached down with giant strength, nudging the ship upward, seeming to hang suspended, waiting. "Press it!" The senator's hand pressed the dummy key. He was committed. As if the ship had really been waiting, it lifted, faster and faster. "Major?" "I have it, sir." The major's hands were flying over his bank of controls, correcting the slight unbalance of thrusts, holding the ship as steady as if he were in it. Already the ship was beyond visual sight, picking up speed. But the pip on the radar screens was strong and clear. The drone of the strong. The senator sat and waited. He had done his job. He felt it perhaps would have been better to have had the photographers on the spot, but realized the carefully directed and rehearsed pictures to be taken later would make better vote fodder. "It's already out in space now, Senator," Jennings found a second of time to call it to the senator. The pips and the signals were bright and clear, coming through the ionosphere, the Heaviside layer as they had been designed to do. Jennings wondered if the senator could ever be made to understand the simple honesty of scientists who had worked that out so well and true. Bright and strong and clear. And then there was nothing! The screens were blank. The sounds were gone. silence. "It shut! It shut off!" Major Eddy's voice was shrill in amazement. "It cut right out. Colonel. No fade, no dying signal, just out!" It was the first time Jennings had ever heard a note of excitement in Professor Stein's voice. The phone began to ring, loud and shrill. That would be from the General's observation post, where he, too, must have lost the signal. The excitement penetrated the senator's rosy dream of vast acreages being sold at a huge profit, giant walls of factories going up under his remote-control ownership. "What's wrong?" he asked. Jennings did not answer him. "What was the altitude?" he asked. The phone continued to ring, but he was not yet ready to answer it. "Hundred fifty miles, maybe a little more," Major Eddy answered in a dull voice. "And then, nothing," he repeated incredulously. "Nothing." The phone was one long ring now, taken off of automatic signal and rung with a hand key pressed down and held there. In a daze, Jennings picked up the phone. "Yes, General," he answered as though he were no more than a robot. He hardly listened to the general's questions, did not need the report that every radarscope throughout the area had lost contact at the same instant. Somehow he had known that would be true, that it wasn't just his own mechanisms failing. One question did penetrate his stunned mind. "How is the senator taking it?" the general asked finally. "Uncomprehending, as yet," Jennings answered cryptically. "But even there it will penetrate sooner or later. We'll have to face it then." "Yes," the general sighed. "What about safety? What if it fell on a big city, for example?" "It had escape velocity," Jennings answered. "It would simply follow its trajectory indefinitely -- which was away from Earth." "What's happening now?" the senator asked arrogantly. He had been out of the limelight long enough, longer than was usual or necessary. He didn't like it when people went about their business as if he were not present. "Quiet during the test, Senator," Jennings took his mouth from the phone long enough to reprove the man gently. Apparently he got away with it, for the senator put his finger to his lips knowingly and sat back again. "The senator's starting to ask questions?" the general asked into the phone. "Yes, sir. It won't be long now." "I hate to contemplate it, Jim," the general said in apprehension. "There's only one way he'll transinto the air and lost." Then sharply. "There must be something you've done. Colonel. Some mistake you've made." T he implied accusation struck at Jennings' stomach, a heavy blow. "That's the way it's going to be?" he stated the question, knowing its answer. "For the good of the service," the general answered with a stock phrase. "If it is the fault of one officer and his men, we may be given another chance. If it is the failure of science itself, we won't." "I see," the colonel answered. "You won't be the first soldier, Colonel, to be unjustly punished to maintain public faith in the service." "Yes, sir," Jennings answered as formally as if he were already facing court martial. "It's back!" Major Eddy shouted in his excitement. "It's back, Colonel!" The pip, truly, showed startlingly clear and sharp on the radarscope, the correct signals were coming in sure and strong. As suddenly as the ship had cut out, it was back. "It's back, General," Colonel Jennings shouted into the phone, his eyes fixed upon his own radarscope. He dropped the phone without waiting for the general's answer. "Good," exclaimed the senator. "I was getting a little bored with nothing happening." "Have you got control?" Jennings called to the major. "Can't tell yet. It's coming in too fast. I'm trying to slow it. 'We'll know in a minute." "You have it now," Professor Stein spoke up quietly. "It's slowing. It will be in the atmosphere soon. Slow it as much as you can." As surely as if he were sitting in its control room, Eddy slowed the ship, easing it down into the atmosphere. The instruments recorded the results of his playing upon the bank of controls, as sound pouring from a musical instrument. "At the take-off point?" Jennings asked. "Can you land it there?" "Close to it," Major Eddy answered. "As close as I can." Now the ship was in visual sight again, and they watched its nose turn in the air, turn from a bullet hurtling earthward to a ship settling to the ground on its belly. Major Eddy was playing his instrument bank as if he were the soloist in a vast orchestra at the height of a crescendo forte. Jennings grabbed up the phone again. "Transportation!" he shouted. "Already dispatched, sir," the operator at the other end responded.  Through the periscope slit, Jennings watched the ship settle lightly downward to the ground, as though it were a breezeborne feather instead of its tons of metal. It seemed to settle itself, still, and become inanimate again. Major Eddy dropped his hands away from his instrument bank, an exhausted virtuoso. "My congratulations!" the senator included all three men in his sweeping glance. "It was remarkable how you all had control at every instance. My progress report will certainly bear that notation." The three men looked at him, and realized there was no irony in his words, no sarcasm, no realization at all of what had truly happened. "I can see a va-a-ast fleet of no-o-ble ships... the senator began to orate. But the roar of the arriving jeep outside took his audience away from him. They made a dash for the bunker door, no longer interested in the senator and his progress report. It was the progress report as revealed by the instruments on the ship which interested them more. The senator was close behind them as they piled out of the bunker door, and into the jeep, with Jennings unceremoniously pulling the driver from the wheel and taking his place. Over the rough dirt road toward the launching site where the ship had come to rest, their minds were bemused and feverish, as they projected ahead, trying to read in advance what the instruments would reveal of that blank period. The senator's mind projected even farther ahead to the fleet of space ships he would own and control. And he had been worried about some ignorant stupid voters! Stupid animals! How he despised them! What would he care about voters when he could be master of the spaceways to the stars? Jennings swerved the jeep off the dirt road and took out across the hummocks of sagebrush to the ship a few rods away. He hardly slacked speed, and in a swirl of dust pulled up to the side of the ship. Before it had even stopped, the men were piling out of the jeep, running toward the side of the ship. And stopped short. eyes, to absorb the incredible, they stared at the swinging open door in the side of the ship. Slowly they realized the iridescent purple glow around the doorframe, the rotted metal, disintegrating and falling to the dirt below. The implications of the tampering with the door held them unmoving. Only the senator had not caught it yet. Slower than they, now he was chugging up 'to where they had stopped, an elephantine amble. "Well, well, what's holding us up?" he panted irritably. Cautiously then, Jennings moved toward the open door. And as cautiously, Major Eddy and Professor Stein followed him. O'Noonan hung behind, sensing the caution, but not knowing the reason behind it. They entered the ship, wary of what might be lurking inside, what had burned open the door out there in space, what had been able to capture the ship, cut it off from its contact with controls, stop it in its headlong flight out into space, turn it, return it to their controls at precisely the same point and altitude. Wary, but they entered. At first glance, nothing seemed disturbed. The bulkhead leading to the power plant was still whole. But farther down the passage, the door leading to the control room where the instruments were housed also swung open. It, too, showed the iridescent purple disintegration of its metal frame. They hardly recognized the control room. They had known it intimately, had helped to build and fit it. They knew each weld, each nut and bolt. "The instruments are gone," the professor gasped in awe. It was true. As they crowded there in the doorway, they saw the gaping holes along the walls where the instruments had been inserted, one by one, each to tell its own story of conditions in space. The senator pushed himself into the room and looked about him. Even he could tell the room had been dismantled. "What kind of sabotage is this?" he exclaimed, and turned in anger toward Jennings. No one answered him. Jennings did not even bother to meet the accusing eyes. They walked down the narrow passage between the twisted frames where the instruments should have been. They came to the spot where the master integrator should have stood, the one which should have co-ordinated all the results of lifesustenance measurements, the one which was to give them their progress report. There, too, was a gaping hole -- but not without its message. Etched in the metal frame, in the same iridescent purple glow, were two words. Two enigmatic words to reverberate throughout the world, burned in by some watcher -- some keeper -- some warden. "Not yet" Manly Age in Earth's not-too-distant future, complete with legal duels, destructive "thrill parties", subjugated women, and such pleasant diversions as bullfights -- but what happens when an intelligent mutant bull enters the picture is moderately world-shaking. W. W. Skupeldyckle presents Dick, and others. On earth and in space. Humanity was the beneficiary of DornoTs great experiments, for it supplied -- By S. A. Lombino guinea pigs this time?" Krai asked, a touch of bitterness, tinging his voice. Dornal smiled a crooked smile, and stroked the carefully trimmed beard that clung to his fine jaw. His right eyebrow lifted ever so slightly, and his blue eyes twinkled with faint puzzlement. "Surely you're not concerned?" he asked Krai. "Excuse me," Krai said sarcastically, "I lost my head." He turned on his heel, presenting the broad back of his yellow tunic to Dornal, strode rapidly toward the .plasteel door at the far end of the chamber. "Just a moment!" Dornal's voice cracked like a whip. Krai turned to face his superior officer. "Yes?" he asked. "I'm not sure I like your attitude," Dornal said. The smile had vanished from his lips. He stood now, tall, proud, regal. The blackness of his thick, flowing hair and his short beard framed the perfect oval of his face. His brows were knitted in consternation, and the eyes that examined Krai were cold -- and a little cruel. Krai met Dornal's eyes with his own and slowly said, "And I'm not sure I like yours either." Dornal's hand dropped automatically to the stun gun hanging in the plastic holster at his waist. He seemed to think better of it, looped his thumb into his belt instead. Again, he smiled charmingly, his teeth flashing in a white, even grin. "Krai," he said, "don't be a fool." "Damnit, I'm not being a fool!" Krai shouted. "I'm just getting fed up. God, how much longer is this going to go on, this indiscriminate use of human beings as -- " "You're upset," Dornal said, not unkindly. "Borrow a ship, take a hop to the Moon. It'll do you good. Spend a little..." "I don't need a pleasure cruise to the Moon. It'd only remind me of the guinea pigs who made that trip possible." "All right then, Krai, what do you want?" "I want to resign," Krai said evenly. "I want to resign from your service. You can get a ne.w assistant. I want to leave your whole stinking government to you. You alone. I want you to handle all of your own rotten experiments. I want to... "That's enough!" Dornal's stun gun was in his hand now. With a quick motion of his other hand, Domal flicked the potency lever on the gun. Krai knew it was up full now, and Dornal would shoot to kill. "Go on," he said. "Squeeze the trigger." "I hope you're not daring me. Krai." Dornal's voice was cold. Krai suddenly spread his arms in despair. "Dornal, look, there are other ways. Man had other ways before you... before we began to tamper. Science was beginning to solve its own problems. It was just a matter of..." "It was a matter of decadence," Dornal interrupted. "Before I became Chief, science was floundering about in its own offal. Who cured cancer? Who defeated polio? Who reached the Moon? And Mars? Venus? Who, Krai, who?" "Do you think you did? Do you think for one minute it was you, Dornal?" "Yes," Dornal answered proudly. "It was. Krai. It was I who made these things possible. Before me, there was stupidity and blind sentiment. They depended on volunteers, and when they had no volunteers they had to fumble around with animals. By conscription of human beings these wonderful things have been made possible. Now, when we are on the verge of another great experiment, you show your chicken heart!" "Another experiment that will kill more people," Krai added. "Perhaps," Dornal admitted. "Perhaps. It doesn't matter. Perhaps they'll be successful the first time, and then no one would be lost." Krai spat in disgust. "Did they cure cancer the first time? How many humans did you murder to discover the cause of cancer?" "And how many did we save by discovering the cause and bringing about a cure?" "Don't say 'we'; It was all your doing." "On the contrary," Dornal said. "It was our doing." "How many space ships did you send out into the blackness before we reached the Moon?" Krai persisted. "And then Mars and Venus? How many lives did you throw away?" "I must remind you," Dornal said softly, "that I rule this universe. You are only my assistant, a position granted by my grace. I do what is best for the population." "And I help," Krai said. "Yes. You help." "Who are you to say that so many people must die to make things easier for those who survive them? No one has that power, Dornal. No one but..." "God," Dornal finished. "No one but God." Krai's lips tightened across his face. He turned to go. "I wasn't aware I'd dismissed you," Dornal snapped. Krai turned to face Domal. "Sir?" he asked. "The new ship leaves tomorrow at oh-two-hundred. I'll need only two men to man her. Good men, Krai. This isn't going to be the usual hop. We're reaching for the stars this time -- we're going to explore a new universe. Once we break the chains that bind us to our own solar system, nothing can stop us. Nothing!" "You'll have your two men, sir," Krai said. "Will that be all, sir?" "Dismissed," Dornal said. He slipped his stun gun back into its holster as Krai opened the plasteel door and left the chamber. T he enormous ship stood on spidery legs, nose pointed skyward. The sand spread out beneath it, bathed in the bluish light of the stars. Domal glanced upwards, his eyes darting from one pinpoint of light to the next. The slow smile crossed his face again, and his fingers ran smoothly through his short, immaculate beard. Impatiently, he glanced at his wrist-chron. The ship was set for blastoff at oh-two-hundred. It was now oh-one-fifty and there was still no sign of Krai. From the control tower, a loudspeaker blared, "Red minus five. Red minus five." The ground car screeched onto the desert sand, and Krai stepped out, waiting for the two young men to follow him. Together, they took long strides across the sand to where Domal was standing. "I knew you wouldn't fail me," he said to Krai. "Two more or less," Krai shrugged. "What's the difference now?" "Exactly," Domal agreed. "Two more or less." "Red minus three" the speaker blared. "Red minus three." "We'd better get aboard and show the men the ship, sir," Krai said. "They'll be blasting off in eight minutes." "Yes, yes," Dornal said. He glanced upwards at the stars as he mounted the ladder to the nose turret. Krai followed Dornal, but not too closely. Behind him were the two chosen men. They were strangely silent, a little pale. "Red minus one" the speaker announced. With a powerful backward thrust, Krai kicked the man behind him. There was a short grunt of surprise, as the first man tumbled backwards, down the ladder, carrying the second man with him. They rolled over in the sand as Krai raced up the remaining rungs and into the turret. "Red condition," the speaker warned. "Green minus five." Krai snapped the hatch shut and twisted the lock wheel. Dornal was peering up out of the blister, his back to Krai. "Soon it will all be mine," he said, scanning the univcrs#. "Yes," Krai agreed. Somewhere below, the powerful turbo-jets hummed into action, building power. The sound jostled Dornal. He turned to face Krai. "Green minus three" the speaker announced. Krai felt the ship tremble with the increasing power of the jets. In less than three minutes, the ship would be hurled into space, hurled into unknown universes. A look of surprise crossed Dornal's face as he stared around the cabin. "Where are the pilots? What's... He noticed the strained look on Krai's face then. "Green minus two. Standby for blastoff." "What are you... ?" "What's two more or less?" Krai shouted. Dornal reached for the space lock, fear marking his face. The desert sands began to glow red and yellow as the jets spewed flame into the darkness. "Green minus one." Dornal clawed at the lock wheel frantically. Krai smashed his fist into Dornal's hysterical features, and the other man crumpled to the deck. In another second, the force of acceleration threw Krai down unconscious beside the other man. Silently, the ship streaked for the stars. (Continued from page #I ) accuracy, the colonel put the ship into subspace drive. Korman leaned back at the conclusion of the brief activity on his control board, and met Gibson's pop-eyed stare. "Interesting, the things worth knowing," he commented. "How to make a weapon, for instance, or whether your enemy has it yet." He almost smiled at his prisoner's expression. "Or even better: knowing exactly how far your enemy has progressed and how fast he can continue, whether to stop him immediately or whether you can remain a step ahead." "B-but -- if both sides are irresistible..." Gibson stammered. Korman examined him contemptuously. "No irresistible weapon exists, or ever will!" he declared. "Only an irresistible process -- the transmission of secrets! You are living proof that no safeguards can defend against that." He savored Gibson's silent discomfort. "I am sure you know how far and how fast the Centaurian scientists will go, Gibson, since I guided you to every laboratory in that plant. Your memory may require some painful jogging when we reach the Solar System; but remember you shall!" "But you -- you were ordered to..." "You didn't think I was a Centaurian, did you?" sneered Korman. "After I just explained to you what is really irresistible?" I I Dear Friends: I was introduced to IP with the January # issue and was very pleasantly surprised. I am tempted to give IF the edge over level of intelligence in the science fiction field, but you realize how unfair this would be to John Campbell andor the publishers of judgment would be based on only one issue of IF. I must read at least # or # issues of IF, before I come to so momentous a decision. Well, at least two or three issues, anyway. My favorite story in the January was it a good story with an unusual twist, but I think it took courage to write and courage to publish it. I admire and respect all concerned for it. somewhat baffled as to what Rog was trying to tell. Is he "fer or agin" belief (faith) ? The title and the structure of the story seem to imply that he's "fer," but I got the distinct impression that he is a whopping logician with his tongue in his cheek. Although Rog does not elaborate on Martin Grant's theory, I think I know one answer (and I imagine there is room for more) to the enigmatic disappearances. To me, it is a very "obvious further step" in logic, as Rog makes Grant suspect there "must" be. Martin Grant's theory "contains within itself the proof that the universe must, by logical necessity, be constructed according to said theory. But observation and experience say this is not true." Martin Grant conjectures, "Either the universe is not constructed acording to logical necessity, or, the observable universe is not the universe." Now, assuming that Grant's theory was that the universe is an illusion, it follows (if I accept this theory) that MY that very same illusion! Illusion and existence become synonymous. The moment "I" become "aware" of this "fact," pop goes istence. The "logical necessity" is, logically, the simultaneity of the illusion-existence of universe and self. To be or not to be applies to the sum total. It is indivisible. Simple. Grant's statement, "observation and experience says this is not true" was correct prior to his own disappearance, but to him alone. It remained correct to each individual only to the point of the individual's disappearance. Naturally, Grant's conjectures are meaningless. -- George Fedak Uniondale, N. Y. We like you, Mr. Fedak, and want you to read at least # or # issues of IF. Please don't get too involved in this puzzle and disappear yourself! Dear Editor: You state that space travel will not appear before the year #. That's all well and good, but then you go on to say that man has to have the driving force of animal survival before he leaves the earth. You then state that there is still fore the earth will be overcrowded. By your own reasoning you seem to think the only motivation for man to leave earth, is that of his own survival. You are absolutely wrong. An overcrowded America was not the reason that explorers went into the deepest parts of Africa, into the unexplored sections of the Amazon, into forbidden Tibet. The three basic motives that will make man venture into space are Adventure, Curiosity and a Challenge. Adventure and Curiosity are self explanatory. I'll explain the third and most important motive, a Challenge. The challenge of going where no other human has ever been before, the challenge of standing on an alien planet where no other human foot has ever trod, the challenge of meeting and establishing contact with alien life forms, these challenges and many more will drive man on to the planets and finally to the stars. Adventure, Curiosity, and the Challenge will send man out into space, not survival. -- Lyle Kessler Philadelphia, Pa. A nice, idealistic concept -- and the sort of idea that makes science fiction possible, for which we're thankful! But some challenges do go unanswered. Africa, the Amazon, Tibet presented purely practical motives too, and besides could be attacked by individuals; space is going to take organization and an awful lot of money. But we'll make it yet! Dear Mr. Quinn: However, his factual research was lacking. On page #, Rog (Curt) states, "Your father can't be declared legally, ah, departed for two years." (The underscore is mine.) Being an ex-insurance man for many long years, indirectly connected with legal adjustments and actuarial departments, I am positive that vanished persons are not declared legally dead until seven years have passed. This factual error might detract reader interest with many fantasy would not want done. -- Elmer R. Kirk surface, making conditions there a matter for speculation. No water vapar or oxygen can be detected in Venus' atmosphere, but there is an abundance of carbon dioxide. The spaceship shown is traveling in a power-off attitude, but will make a tail-first landing under power -- if it finds anything to land on! (Drawings by Ed Valigursky) L  w gf V M t  J KKJ k K H I  I   k I pmmM r t M  B T I TW nlBr#!l Til I rrnMiiM I  Jl ;,i   I  yi , 'j ; y i ' ' A  A :' y-id ' iH ." sights encountered by space explorers Comprised of nil! ions of tiny mconfets in three bends, the rings ore brighter than the planet Itself. Although the distance from the mner to the outer edge is #I # miles, they ore microscopicolly thin by comporison ten miles at most -- ond fode owoy toward the inner edge. it All Stories New ond Complete CovcT by Krn illuslrdting A Case of Conuiencs I IF is publEUd hi-raonthlT bv Qdiroi Publkshmg CrupAiiy, Inc. Volume #, No. #. Copyright # by Quinn PtiMisning ()o., Inc. Ofire of publication. # Lord Street. BuRalo, New York. Entered n Second Matter at Pon Office, Buffalo. NeM York. Subscription #L# (or # bsuts io U.S, and Pm:;eisions: Canada S# tor # lfues; elsewhere #.S#. Allow lour weeks for change of address. Ail storie.s appear i in thh manzine are Erlioo: any imilatity to actual persoas is coindarntal. Not responsible for uqa kited ait work or manuscripts. #c a copy. Printed in L.S.A. SOaC ft # aiUlA Al Iftne I A A the "# Almanack' issue of Punch, the British humorous weekly. This special issue contained an interplanetary section, partly hilarious and pardy incomprehensible. The cartoon, signed by "Sprod," pictures a moonscape. Three Earthmen in bubble helmets stand gazing at the smouldering, burned-out shell of their spaceship, which has obviously exploded and crashed. They are smiling. One of them is saying brightly, "Ah well, thank  gcness we still have our sense of humor." One of the basic assumptions, I suppose, is that a spaceship flying the Union Jack will be the first to reach the moon. The cartoonist is clearly poking some fond fun at his countrymen as svell as at science fiction. And while his prediction may be parsecs off the orbit, his attitude has my warm approval. I won't say it's more humor that science fiction needs. Good science fiction humor is hard to write, largely because good humor is hard to write, period. There are people who do marvelously well at it: William Tenn, Damon Knight, Frederic Brown, Mack Reynolds, Henry Kuttner, C. M. Kombluth, R. Bretnor, L. Sprague de Camp, Wilson Tucker, for instance. Fritz Leiber's fabulously funny "The Night He Cried" in Frederik Pohl's latest anthology. Star Science Fiction Sto ties, comes as somewhat of a surprise, but is evidence that any good writer can do it even though it's not his usual forte. I What have these people got besides basic writing talent, science fictional imaginations, and the wilU ingness to work hard for love of the medium first and remuneration second? Not just a sense of humor, surely. It's more all-encompassing tlian that. amount of healthy perspective, an ability to step back from a problem and view it from various angles. This is a highly desirable quality for any writer and any person, but that doesn't mean everyone who writes science fiction has it! There has always been bad science fiction. We're extremely fortunate that the percentage is not noticeably higher than before, now that the field has expanded so enormously. The world today is in many ways a gloomy and frightening place. It will quite likely get worse before it gets better. It's even possible that man wiU blow himself and hia works completely to smithereens... Wait a minute, though -- complelely to smithereens? Shucks, almost nothing succeeds that well. Somebody and something would be left after the smash. And it wouldn't have to be a primitive tribe of rainworshippers in the Brazilian jungles, one lone man who just happened to be down in a mine shaft (while all the miners elsewhere in the world were out on strike, presumably), or (tltis one is more rare now, anyway) Prof. Superpill and his carefully iclcctcd group of vegetarians in their invisible dome of force at the South Pole. It could be a small town in the Ozarks; you find some surprisingly intellectual and creative crannies of culture tlicrc, believe it or not! It could be a comic opera-type Balkan kingdom, population # including the village werewolf and a beautiful princess, which has been so neutral for centuries that it has even prohibited radios for fear the children might learn the word "war." It could... But you get the idea; take it from there and write a story! Another theme dear to would-be science fiction writers these davs is the idea of Earth's civilization being unacceptable to the representatives of tlie Galactic Federation. These superbeings, you know, put up "No Trespassing" signs just beyond our atmosphere, reverse the laws of physics so that rockets do need somediing to push against, or just plain smack us nut of existence with a cosmic, flyswatter. It can be done well, and sometimes is. But since most of us are incapable of figuring out how completely rational beings would act, and even less capable of making such beings convincing on paper, there's little excuse for writing it again without a new twist. Why not give the Galactic Federation some eccentricities? If an unhappy ending is called for, it sliould l)e used. (I keep insisting that the essence of tme tragedy is its inevitability. I get into more darned arguments that way -- but can you prove me wrong with examples from literature?) I won't reject a good story if it's unhappy. It can even be unpleasant; shock value can be highly effective if controlled properly. I won't buy a bad story just for a few yuks. But I'll always suspect that the writer who is a healthier specimen than the constant doom-crier. The lowliest newspaper columnist can indulge in all the dire forebodings wc need. If science fiction is going to he distinguishable from a newspaper column, it has no choice but to consider the infinite possibilitic.s of our not blowing ourselves up tomorrow. If the world of today looks bleak to you, extend its trends until they become ridiculous. Remember that there will always be counter-trends. Or forget them all. and create a whole new world. If it's consistent within its own terms, it can be the basis for a good story. Nobody will write that story while worrying himself sick over when the bombs are going to fall. He'll write it when he starts considering ways to keep the bombs from falling. And that includes, of course, the repeal of the law of gravity. -- Its Rarely, if ever, has science fiction plumbed so deeply and with such sensitivity the depths of human thoughts and emotions as in this case. For here, Earthmens vote has a direct effect upon the future of a planet, their own culture and the universe itself. By James Blish Hiustrotd by Ed Ernst) T he stone door slammed. It was Cleaver's trade-mark : there had never been a door too heavy, complex, or cleverly tracked to prevent him from closing it with a sound like a clap of doom. And ro planet in the imiverse could possess an air sufficiently thick and curtained with damp to muffle that sound. Not even Lithia. Ruiz-Sanchez continued to read. It would take Cleaver's impatient fingers quite a while to free him from his jungle suit, and in the meantime the problem remained. It was a century-old problem, first propounded in #, but the Church had never cracked it. And it was diabolically complex (that adverb was official, precisely chosen and literally intended). Even the novel which proposed the case was on the Index, and Father Ramon Ruiz-Sanchez, S. J., had access to it only by virtue of his Order. He turned the page, scarcely hearing the stamping and muttering in the hall. On and on the text ran, becoming more tangled, more evil, more insoluble with every w'ord : "... and Magravius knows from .spies that Anita has formerly committed double sacrilege with Michael, vulgo Cerularius, a perpetual curate, who wishes to seduce Eugenius. Magravius threatens to have Anita molested by Sulla, an orffiodox savage (and leader of a band of twelve mercenaries, the Sullivani), who desires to procure Felicia for Gregorius, Leo, Viteilius and Macdugalius, four excavators, if she will not yield to him and also deceive Honuphrius by rendering conjugal duty when demanded. Anita, who claims to have discovered incestuous temptations from Jeremias and Eugenius -- " There now, he was lost again. He backtracked resignedly. Jeremias and Eugenius were -- ? Oh, yes, the "brotherly lovers" at the beginning of the case, consanguineous to the lowest degree with both Felicia and Honuphrius -- the latter the apparent prime villain and the husband of Anita. It was Magravius, who seemed to admire Honuphrius, who had been urged by the slave Maritius to solicit Anita, seemingly under the urging of Honuphrius himself. This, however, had come to Anita through her tirewoman Fortissa, who was or at one time had been the common-law wife of Mauritius himself and had borne him children -- so that the whole story had to be weighed with the utmost caution. And that entire initial confession of Honuphrius had come out under torture -- voluntarily consented to, to be sure, but still torture. The Fortissa-Mauritius relationship was even more dubious, really only a supposition of Father Ware's, though certainly a plausible one considering the public repentance of Sulla after the death of Canicula, who was -- yes, that was correct, Mauritius' second wife. No, his first wife; he had never been legally married to Fortissa. It was Magravius' desire for had confused him diere. "Ramon, give me a hand, will you?" Cleaver shouted suddenly. "I'm stuck and -- and I don't feel well." The Jesuit biologist arose in alarm. Such an admission from Cleaver was imprecedented. a pouf of woven rushes, stuffed with a sphagnum-like moss, which was bulging at the equator under his weight. He was half-way out of his glass-fiber jungle suit, and his face was white and beaded with sweat, although his helmet was already off. His uncertain fingers tore at a jammed zipper. "Paul! Why didn't you say you were #I in the first place? Here, let go of that; you're only making things worse. What happened?" "Don't know exactly," Cleaver said, breathing heavily but relinquishing the zipper. Ruiz-Sanchez knelt beside him and began to work it carefully back onto its tracks. "Went a ways into the jungle to see if I could spot more pegmatite lies; it's been in the back of my mind that a pilot-plant for turning out tritium might locate here eventually -- ought to be able to produce on a prodigious scale." "God forbid," Ruiz-Sanchez said under his breath. "Hm? Anyhow, I didn't see anything. Few lizards, hoppers, the usual thing. Then I ran up against a plant that looked a little like a pineapple, and one of the spines jabbed right through my suit and nicked me. Didn't seem serious, but -- " "But we don't have the suits for nothing. Let's look at it. Here, put up your feet and we'U haul those boots off. Where did you get -- oh. Well, it's angry-looking, I'll give it that. Any other symptoms?" "My mouth feels raw," Cleaver complained. "Open up," the Jesuit commanded. When Cleaver complied, it becajne evident that his complaint had been the understatement of the year. The mucosa inside his mouth wa.s nearly covered with ugly and undoubtedly painful ulcers, their edges as sharply defined as if cut with a cookie-punch. Ruiz-Sanchez made no comment, however, and deliberately changed his expression to one of carefully calculated dismissalIf the physicist needed to minimize his ailments, it was all right with Ruiz-Sanchez. An alien planet is not a good place to strip a man of his inner defenses. "Come into the lab," he said. "You've got some inflammation in there." Cleaver aro.se, a little unsteadily, and followed the Jesuit into the laboratory. There Ruiz-Sanchez took .smears from several of the ulcers onto microscope slides and Gram-stained them. He filled the time consumed by the staining process with the ritual of aiming the microscope's substage mirror out cloud. When the timer's alarm went off, he rin-sed and flame-dried the first slide and slipped it under the clips. As he had half feared, he saw chetes which would have indicated a case of ordinary, Earthly, Vincent's angina -- which the clinical picture certainly suggested. Cleaver's oral flora were normal, though on the increase because of all the exposed ti.ssue. "I'm going to give you a shot," Ruiz-Sanchez said gently. "And then I think you'd better go to bed." "The hell with that," Cleaver said. "I've got nine times as much work to do as I can hope to clean up, without any additional handicaps." "Illness is never convenient,' Ruiz-Sanchez agreed. "But why worry about losing a day or so, since you're in over your head anyhow?" "What have I got?" Cleaver asked suspiciously. "'ou haven't got anything." Ruiz-Sanchez said, almost regretfully. "That is, you aren't infected. But your 'pineapple' did you a bad tuni. Most plants of that family on Litlua bear thorns or leaves coated with polysaccharides that are poisonous to us. The particular glucoside you got today was evidently squill, or something closely related to it. It produces symptoms like tJiose of trench-moudi, but a lot harder to clear up." "How long will that take?" Cleaver said. He was still balking, but he was on the defensive now. "Several days at least -- until you've built up an immimity. The shot I'm going to give you is a gamma globulin specific against squill, and it ought to moderate the symptoms until you've developed a high antibody tiler of your own. But in the process you're going to run quite a fever, Paul; and I'll have to keep you well stuffed with antipTetics, because even a little fever is dangerous in this climate." "I know it," Cleaver said, mollified. "The more I leain about this place, the less disposed I am to vote 'aye' when the time comes. Well, bring on your shot -- and your aspirin. I suppose I ought to be glad it isn't a bacterial infection, or the Snakes would be jabbing me full of antibiotics," "Small chance of that," RuizSanchez said. "I don't doubt that the Lithians have at least a hundred different antibiotics we'll be able to use eventually, but -- there, that's all there is to it; you can relax now -- but we'll have to study their pharmacology from the CTound up, first. All right, Paul, nit the hammock. In about ten minutes you're going to wish you were bom dead, that I promise you." face under its thatch of dirty blond hair was craggy and powerful even in illness. He stood up and deliberately rolled down his deeve. "Not much doubt about how you'll vote, either," he said. "You like this planet, don't you, Ramon? It's a biologist's paradise, as far as I can "I do like it," the priest said, smiling back. He followed Cleaver into the small room which served them both as sleeping quarters. Except for the window, it strongly resembled the inside of a jug. The walls were curving and continuous, and were made of some ceramic material which never beaded or felt wet, but riever seemed to be quite dry, either. The hammocks wer slung from hooks which projected smoothly from the walls. "But don't forget that Lithia's my first extrasolar planet. I think I'd find any new, habitable world fascinating. The infinite mutability of lifeforms, and the cunning inherent in each of them... It's all amazing and very delightful." Cleaver sprawled heavily in his hammock. After a decent interval, Ruiz-Sanchez took the liberty of heaving up after him the foot he seemed to have forgotten. Cleaver didn't notice. The reaction was setting in. "Read me no tracts, Father," Cleaver said. Then: "I didn't mean that. I'm sorry... But for a physicist, this place is hell... You'd better get me that aspirin. I'm cold." "Surely." Ruiz-Sanchez went quickly back into the lab, made up a salicylate-barbiturate paste in one of the Lithians' superb mortars, and pressed it into a set of pills. He wished he could stamp each pill "Bayer" before it dried -- if Cleaver's personal cure-all was aspirin, it would be just as well to let him think he was taking aspirin -- but he had no dies for the purpose. He took two of the pills back to Cleaver with a mug and a carafe of Berkefield-filtered water. The big man was already asleep; Ruiz-Sanchez woke him. Cleaver would sleep longer and awake farther along the road to recovery if he were done that small unkindness now. As it was, he hardly noticed when the pills were put down him, and soon resumed his heavy, troubled breathing. That done, Ruiz-Sanchez returned to the front room of the house, sat down, and began to inspect the jungle suit. The tear which the plant spine had made was not difficult to find, and would be easy to repair. It w-ould be much harder to repair Cleaver's notion that their defenses were invulnerable, and that plants could be blundered against with impunity. Ruiz-Sanchez wondered if one or both of the other members of the Commission still shared that notion. Cleaver had called the thing which had brought him low a "pineapple." .-ny biologist could have told Cleaver that even on Earth the pineapple is a prolific and dangerous weed, edible only by a happy and irrelevant accident. In Hawaii, as Ruiz-Sanchez remembered, the tropical forest was quite impassible to anyone not wearing heav' boots and tough trou.sers. 'Fhe close-packed, irrepresdble pineapples outside of the plantations could tear unprotected legs to ribbons. The Jesuit turned the suit over. The zipper that Cleaver had jammed was made of a plastic into the molecule of which had been incorporated radicals from various Terrestrial anti-fungal substances, chiefly tliiolutin. The fungi of Lithia respected those, all right, but die elaborate molecule of die plastic itself had a tendency, under Lithian humidities and licats, to undergo polymerization more or less spontaneously. That was what had happened here . One of the teeth of the zipper had changed into something resembling a piece of popcorn. Sanchez worked. There was a routed puff of sound, and the room was illuminated with small, soft yellow flames from recesses in every wall. The burning substance was natural gas, of which Lithia had an inexhaustible and constantly renevsed supply. The flames were lit by adsorption against a catalyst, as soon as the gas came on. A lime mantle, which worked on a rack and pinion of heatproof glass, could be moved into the flame to provide a brighter liglu; but the priest liked the yellow light the Lithians themselves preferred, and used the limelight only in the laboratory. For .some things, of course, the Earlhmen had to liave electricity, for which they had been forced to supply their own generators. The Lithians had a far more advanced science of electrostatics than Earth had, but of electrodynamics they knew comparatively little. They had discovered magnetism only a few years before, since natural magnets were unknown on the planet. They had fint observed the phenomenon, not in iron, of which they had next to none, but in liquid oxygen -- a difficult substance from which to make generator coil cores! The results in terms of Lithian civilization were peculiar, to an Earthman. The tall, reptilian people had built several huge electrostatic generators and scores of little ones, but had nothing even vaguely resembling telephones. They knew a great deal on the practical level about electrolysis, but carrying a current over a long distance -- sa' one kilometer -- was regarded by them as impossible. They had no electric motors as an Earthman would understand the term, but made fast intercontinental flights in jet aircraft powered by static electricity. Cleaver said he understood this feat, but RuizSanchez certainly did not They had a completely marvelous radio network, which among other things provided a "live" navigational grid for the whole planet, zeroed on (and here perhaps was the epitome of the Lithian genius for paradox) a tree. Yet they had never produced a commercial vacuum tube and their atomic theory was not much more sophisticated than Democritus' had been! These paradoxes, of course, could be expired in part by the things that Lithia lacked. Like any large rotating mass, Lithia had a magnetic field of its own, but a planet which almost entirely lacks iron provides its people with no easy way to discover magnetism. Radioactivity, at least until the Earthmen had arrived, had been entirely imknown on the surface of Lithia, which explained the hazy atomic theory. Like the Greeks, the Lithians had discovered that friction between silk and glass produces one kind of charge, and between silk and amber another. They had gone on from there to Widmanstetten generators, electrochemistry, and the static jet -- but without suitable metals they were unable to make batteries or do more than begin to study electricity in motion. In the fields where they had been given fair clues, they had made enormous preess. Despite the constant cloudiness and endemic drizzle, their descriptive astronomy was excellent, thanks to the fortunate presence of a small moon which had drawn their attention outward early. This in turn made for basic advances in optics. Their chemistry took full advantage of both the seas and the jungles. From the one they took such vital and diversified products as agar, iodine, salt, trace metals, and foods of many kinds. The other provided nearly everything else that they needed: resins, rubbers, woods of all degrees of hardness, edible and essential oils, vegetable "butters," rope and other filers, fruits and nuts, tannins, dyes, drugs, cork, paper. Indeed, the sole forest product which they did not take was game, and the reason for this oversight was hard to find. It seemed to the Jesuit to be religious -- yet the Lithians had no religion, and they certainly ate many of the creatures of the sea without qualms of conscience. H e dropped the jungle suit into his lap with a sigh, though the popcomed tooth still was not completely trimmed back into shape. Outside, in the humid darkness, Lithia was in full concert. It was a vital, somehow fresh, newsounding drone, covering most of the sound spectrum audible to an Earthman. It came from the myriad insects of Lithia. Many of these had wiry, ululating songs, almost like birds, in addition to the scrapes and chirrups and wing-buzzes of the insects of Earth. Had Eden sounded like that, before evil had come into the world? Ruiz-Sanchez wondered. Certainly his native Peru sang no such song. Qualms of conscience -- these were, in the long run, his essential business, rather than the taxonomical jungles of biology, which had already become tangled into nearhopelessness on Earth before spaceflight had come along to add whole new volumes of puzzles. It was only interesting that the Lithians were bipedal reptiles with marsupial-like pouches and pteropsid circulatory systems. But it was vital that they had qualms of conscience -- if they did. He and the other three men were on Lithia to decide whether or not Lithia would be suitable as a port of call for Earth, without risk of damage to either Earthmen or Lithians. The other three men w'ere primarily scientists, but RuizSaruhez own recommendation would in the long run depend upon conscience, not upon taxonomy. He looked down at the still-imperfect suit with a troubled face until he heard Cleaver moan. Then he arose and left the room to the softly hissing flames. II  F rom the oval fmnt window of the house to which Cleaver and Ruiz-Sanchez had been assigned, the land slanted away with insidious gentleness toward the ill-defined south edge of Lower Bay, a part of the Gulf of Sfath. Most of the area was salt marsh, as was the sea-side nearly everywhere on Lithia. When the tide was In, the flats w'cre covered to a depth of a meter or so almost half the way to the house. When it was out, as it was tonight, the jungle symphony was augmented by the agonized barking of a score of species of lungfish. Occasionally, when the small moon was unoccludcd and the light from the city was unusually bright, one could sec the leaping shadow of some amphibian, or the sinuously advancing sigmoid track of the Lithian crocodile, in pursuit of some prey faster than itself but which it would nonetheless capture in its own geological good time. Still farther -- and usually invisible even in daytime because of the pervasive mists -- was the opposite shore of Lower Bay, beginning with tidal flats again, and then more jungle, which ran unbroken thereafter for hundreds of kilometers to the equatorial sea. Behind the house, visible from the sleeping room, was the rest of the city, Xoredeshch Sfath, capitol of the great southern continent. Like all the cities the Lithians built, its most striking characteristic to an Earthman was that it hardly seemed to be there at all. The Lithian houses were low, and made of the earth which had been dug from their foundations, so that they tended to fade into tlic soil even to a trained observer. Most of the older buildings were rectangular, put together without mortar of ramraed-earth blocks. Over tlie course of decades the blocks continued to pack and settle themselves until it became easier to abandon an unwanted building than to tear it down. One of the first setbacks the Earthmen had suffered on Lithia had come through an ill-advised offer to raze gravity-polarized explosive unknown to the Lithians. The warehouse in question was large, thickwalled, and three Lithian centuries old. The explosion created an uproar which greatly distressed the Lithians, but when it was over, the storehouse still stood, unshaken. Newer structures were more conspicuous when the sun was out, for just during the past half century the Lithians had begun to apply their enormous knowledge of ceramics to house construction. The new houses assumed thousands of fantastic, quasi-biological shapes, not quite amorphous but not quite resembling any form in experience either. Each one was unique and to the choice of its owner, yet all markedly shared the character of the community and tlie earth from which it sprang. These houses, too, would have blended well with the background of soil and jungle, except that most of them were glazed and so shone blindingly for brief moments on sunny days when the light and the angle of the observer was just right. These shifting coruscations, seen from the air, had been the Elarthmen's first intimation that there was intelligent life in the ubiquitous Lithian jungle. Ruiz-Sanchez looked out the sleeping-room window at the city for at least the ten thousandth time on his way to Cleaver's hammock. Xoredeshch Sfath was alive to him ; it never looked the same twice. He found it singularly beautiful. He checked Cleaver's pulse and respiration. Both were fast, even for Lithia, where a high carlxn dioxide partial pressure raised the pH of the blood of Earthmen to an abnormal level and stimulated the breathing reflex. The priest judged, however, diat Cleaver was in bttle danger as long as his actual oxygen utilization was not increased. At the moment he was certainly sleeping deeply -- if not very restfully -- and it would do no harm to leave him alone for a little while. Of course, if a wild allosaur should blunder into the city... But that was about as likely as the blundering of an untended elephant into the heart of New Delhi. It could happen, but almost never did. And no other dangerous Lithian animal could break into the house if it were sealed. carafe of fre water in the niche beside the hammock, went into the hall, and donned boots, macintosh and waterproof hat. The night souneb of Lithia burst in upon him as he opened the stone door, along with a gust of sea air and the characteristic halogen odor most people call "salty." There was a thin drizzle falling, making haloes around the lights of Xoredeshch Sfath. Far out, on the water, another light moved. That was probably the coastal side-wheeler to Yllith, the enormous island which stood athwart the Upper Bay, barring the Gulf of Sfath as a whole from the equatorial sea. Outside, Ruiz-Sanchez turned the wheel which extended bolts on every margin of the door. Drawing from his macintosh a piece of soft chalk, he marked on sheltered tablet designed for such uses the Lithian symbols which meant "Illness is here." That would be sufficient. Anybody who chose to could open the door simply by turning the wheel, but the Lithians were overridingly social beings, who respected their own conventions as they would respect natural law. That done, Ruiz-Sanchez set out for the center of the city and the Mes.sage Tree. The asphalt streets shone in the yellow lights cast from windows, and in the white light of the mantled, wide-spaced street lanterns. Occasionally he passed the eight-foot, kangaroo-like shape of a Lithian, and the two exchanged glances of frank curiosity, but there were not many Lithians abroad now. They kept to their houses at night, doing Ruiz-Sanchez knew not what. He could see them frequently, alone or by twos or threes, moving behind the oval windows of the houses he passed. Sometimes they seemed to be talking. What about? It was a nice question. The Lithians had no crime, no newspapers, no household communications systems, no arts that could be differentiated clearly from their crafts, no political parties, no public amusements. no nations, no games, no religions, no sports, no celebrations. Surely they didn't spend every waking minute of their lives exchanging knowledge, disc ussing philosophy or history? Or did they? Perhaps, Ruiz-Sanchez thought suddenly, they simply went inert once they were inside their jugs, like so many pickles! But even as the thought came, the priest passed another house, and saw tlicir silhouettes moving to and fro... A puff of wind scattered rool droplets in his face. Automatically, he quickened his step. If the night were to turn out especially windy, there would doubtless be many voices coming and going in the Message Tree. It loomed ahead of him now, a sequoia-like giant, standing at the mouth of the valley of the River Sfath -- the valley which led in gicat serpentine folds into the heart of the continent, where Gleshchetk Sfatli, or Blood Lake in English, poured out its massive torrents. As llie winds came and went along the valley, the tree nodded and swayed. With every movement. tlie tree's root system, which underlay the entire city, tugged and distorted the buried crystalline cliff upon which the city had been founded, a.s long ago in Iwilhian prehistoiy as was the founding of Rome on Earth. At every such pressure, the buried cliff responded whh a vast lu'art-pulse of radio waves -- a pulse detectable not only all over Lithia, but far out in space as well. These bursts, of course, were sheer noise. How the Lithians modifu.'d them to carry information -- not only messages, but the amazing navigational grid, the planetwide time-signal system, and much more -- was something Ruiz-Sanchez never expected to Icam, although Cleaver said it was all perfectly simple once you understood it. It had something to do with semi-conduction and solid-state physics, which -- again according to Cleaver -- the Lithians understood better than any Earthman. Almost all knowledge, Ruiz-Sanchez reflected with amusement, fell into that category. It was either perfectly simple once you understood it, or else it fell apart into fiction. As a Jesuit -- even here, # light-years from Rome -- Ruiz-Sanchez knew something about knowledge that Cleaver would never learn: that all "knowledge goes through both stages, the annunciation out of noise into fact and the disintegration back into noise again. The process involved was the making of increasingly finer distinctions. The outcome was an endless series of theoretical catastrophes. The residuum was faith. T he high, .sharply vaulted chamber, like an egg stood on its large end, which had been burned out in the base of the Message Tree was droning with life as Ruiz-Sanchez entered it. It would have been difficult to imagine anything less like an Earthly telegraph office or other message center, however. Around the circumference of the lower end of the egg there was a continual whirling of tall figures, Lithians entering and leaving through the many doorlcss entrances and changing places in the swirl of movement like so many electrons passing from orbit to orbit. Despite their numbers, their voices were pitched so low that Ruiz-Sanchez could hear blended in with their murmuring the soughing of the wind through the enormous branches far aloft. The inner side of this band of moving figures was bounded by a high railing of black, polished wood, evidently cut from the phloem of the tree itself. On the other side of this Encke's Division a thin circlet of Lithians took and passed out messages steadily and without a moment's break, handling the total load faultlessly -- if one were to judge by the way the outer band was kept in motion -- and without apparent effort by memory alone. Occasionally one of these specialists would leave the circlet and go to one of the desks which were scattered over most of the rest of the sloping floor, increasingly thinly, like a Crepe Ring, to confer there with the desk's occupant. Then he went back to the black rail, or, sometimes, he took the desk and its previous occupant went to the rail. The bowl deepened, the desks thinned, and at the very center stood a single, aged Lithian, his hands clapped to the ear-whorls behind his heavy jaws, his eyes covered by their nictitating membrane, only his nasal fossae and heat-receptive postnasal pits uncovered. He spoke to no one, and no one consulted him -- but the absolute stasis in which he stood was obviously the reason, the sole reason, for the torrents and countertorrento of p)eople which poured along the outermost ring. Ruiz-Sanchez stopped, astonished. He had never himself been to the Message Tree before -- communicating with the other two earthmen on Lithia had been, until now, one of Cleavers tasks -- and the priest found that he had no idea what to do. The scene before him was more suggestive of a bourse than of a message center in any ordinary sense. It seemed unlikely that so many Lithians could have urgent personal messages to send each time the winds were active; yet it seemed equally uncharacteristic that the Lithians, with their stable, abundance-based economy, should have any equivalent of stock or commodity brokerage. There seemed to be no choice, however, but to plunge in, try to reach the polished black rail, and ask one of those who stood on the other side to try and raise Agronski or Michclis again. At worst, he supposed, he could only be refused, or fail to get a hearing at all. He took a deep breath. Simultaneously, his left elbow was caught in a firm four-fingered grip. Letting the stored breath out again in a snort of surprise, the priest looked around and up at the solicitously bent head of a Lithian. Under the long, trap-like mouth, the being's wattles were a delicate, curious aquamarine, in contrast to its vestial comb, wliich was a pemiaiu'nt and silvery sapphire, shot through with veins of fuchsia. "You are Ruiz-Sanchez," the Lithian said in his own language. The priest's name, unlike that of most of the other Earthmen, fell easily in that tongue. "I know you by your robe." This was pure chance; any Earthnian out in the rain in a macintosh would have been identified as RuizSanchez, becau.se he was the only Earthinan who seemed to the Lithians to w'car the same garment indoors. "I am Chtexa, the metallist, who consulted with you earlier on medicine and on your mission and other matters. We have not seen you here before. Do you wish to talk with the Tree?" "I do," Ruiz-Sanchez said gratefully. "It is so that I am new here. Can you explain to me what to do?" "Yes, but not to any profit," Chtexa said, tilting his head so that his completely iry pupils .shone down into Ruiz-Sanchez' eyes. "One must have obscrvi'd the ritual, which is very complex, until it is habit. Wc have grown up with it, but you I think lack the coordination to follow it on the fint attempt. If I may bear your message instead..." "I would be most indebted. It is for our colleagues Agion.ski and Michelis. They are at Xoicdcshch Gton on the northeast continent, at about # East # North -- " "Yes, the second benchmark, at the outlet of the Lesser Lakes; the city of the potters. And you will say?" "That they arc to join us now, here, at Xoredeshch Sfalh. And that our time on Litlila is almost up." "That me regards. But I will bear it." whirling crowd, and RuizSanchez was left behind, considering again his thankfulness at the pains he Itad taken to learn the Lithian language. Several members of the Terrestrial commission had shown a regrettable lack of interest in that tongue: "Let 'em learn English," had been Cleaver's classic formulation. Ruiz-Sanchez was all the loss likely to view this idea sympathetically considering that his owT) native language was Spanish and his preferred foreign language German. T# Agronslu had taken a slightly more sophisticated stand: it was not, he said, that Lithian was too difficult to pronounce -- certainly it wasn't any harder than Arabic or Russian on the soft palate -- but, after all, "it's hopeless to attempt to grasp the concepts that lie behind a really alien language in the time we have to spend here, isn't it?" To both views, Michelis had said nothing; he had simply set out to learn to read the language first, and if he found his way from there into speaking it, he would not be surprised and neither would his corifreres. That was Michelis' way of doing things, thorough and untheoretical at the same time. As for the other two approaches, RuizSanchez thout privately that it was close to criminal to allow any contact-man for a new planet ever to leave Earth with such parochial notions. Of Cleaver's tendency to refer to the Lithians themselves as "the Snakes," Ruiz-Sanchez' opinion was such as to be admissible only to his remote confessor. And in view of what lay before him now in this egg-shaped hollow, what was Ruiz-Sanchez to think of Cleaver's conduct as communica tions officer for the group? Surely he could never have transmitted or received a single message through the Tree, as he had claimed to have done. Probably he had never been nearer to the Tree than the priest had been. Of course, it went vithout saying that he had been in contact with Agromki and Michelis by some method, but that method evidently had been a private transmitter concealed in his luggage... Yet, physicist though he most definitely was not, Ruiz-Sanchez rejected that solution on the spot; he had some idea of the practical difficulties of ham radio on a world like Lithia, swamped as it was on all wavelengths by the tremendous pulses which the Tree wrung from the buried crystalline cliff. The problem was beginning to make him feel decidedly uncomfortable. Then Chtexa was back, recognizable not so much by any physical detail -- for his wattles were now the same ambiguous royal purple as those of most of the other Lithians in the crowd -- as by the fact that he was obviously bearing down upon the Earthman. "I have sent your message," he said at once. "It is recorded at Xoredehch Gton. But the other Earthmen are not there. They have not been in the city for some days." That was impossible. Cleaver had said he had spoken to Agronski only a day ago. "Are you sure?" RuizSanchez said cautiously. "It admits of no uncertainty. The house which we gave them stands empty. The many things which they had with them are gone." The tall shape raised its small hands in a gesture which might have been solicitous. "I think this is an ill word. I dislike to bring it you. The words which you brought me when we first met were full of good." "Thank you. Don't worry," RuizSanchez said distractedly. "No man could hold the bearer responsible for the word, surely." "Whom else would he hold responsible for it? At least that is our custom," Chtexa said. "And under it, you have lost by our exchange. Your words on iron have been shown to contain great good. I would take pleasure in showing you how we have used them, especially so since I have brought you in return an ill message. If you would sliare my house tonight, without prejudice to your work..." Sternly Ruiz-Sanchez stifled his sudden excitement. Here was the first chance, at long last, to see something of the private life of Lithia! And through that, perhaps, gain some inkling of the moral life, the role in which God had cast the Lithians in the ancient drama of good and evil in tlie past and in the times to come. Until that w'as knpwn, the Lithians in their Eden were only spuriously good: all reason, all organic thinking machines, souls. But there was the hard fart that he had left behind a sick man. There was not much chance that Cleaver would awaken before morning; he had been given nearly # mg. of sedative per kilogram of body weight. But if his burly frame should somehow throw it off, driven perhaps by some anaphylactic crisis impossible to rule out this early, he would need prompt attention. At the very least, he would want badly for the sound of a human voice on this planet which he hated and which had struck him down. Still, the danger to Cleaver was not great. He most certainly did not require a minute-byminute vigil. There was, after all, such a thing as an excess of devotion, a form of pride among the pious which the Church had long found peculiarly difficult to stifle. At its worst, it produced a St. Simon Stylites, who though undoubtedly acceptable to God had for centuries len very bad public relations for tlie Church. And had Cleaver really earned the kind of devotion Ruiz-Sanchez had been proposing, up to now, to tender him as a creature of God? And with a whole planet at stake, a whole people -- A lifetime of meditaticHi over just such problems of conscience had made Ruiz-Sanchez, like any T# other gifted member of his Order, quick to find his way through all but the most complex ethical labyrinths to a decision.' An unsympathetic observer might almost have called him "agile." "Thank you," he said, a little shakily. "I will share your house very gladly." Ill you big slob. Where the hell have you been?" Cleaver groaned and tried to turn over. At his first motion, the world began to rock gently, sickeningly. His mouth was filled with burning pitch. "Cleaver, turn out. It's me -- Agronski. Where's the Father? What's wrong? Why didn't we hear from you? Look out, you'll -- " The warning came too late and Cleaver could not have understood it anyhow; he had been profoundly asleep and had no notion of his situation in space or time. At his convulsive twist away from the nagging voice, the hammock rotated on its hooks and dumped him. He struck the floor stunningly, .taking the main blow across his right shoulder, though he hardly felt it as yet. His feet, not yet part of him at all, still remained afloat far aloft, twisted in the hammock webbing. "Good lord!" There was a brief chain of footsteps, like chestnuts dropping on a roof, and then an overstated crash. "Cleaver, are you sick? Here, lie still a minute and let me get your feet free. Mike -- Mike, can't you turn the gas up in this jug? Something's wrong back here." After a moment, yellow light began to pour from the glistening walls. Cleaver dragged an arm across his eyes, but it did him no good; it tired too quickly. Agronski's mild face, plump and anxious, floated directly above him like a captive balloon. He could not see Michelis anywhere, and at the moment he was just as glad. Agronski's presence wa.s hard enough to understand. "How... the hell..." he said. At the words, his lips split painfully at both corners. He realized for the first time that they had become gummed together, somehow, while he was asleep. He had no idea how long he had been out of the picture. Agronski seemed to understand the alwrted question. "We came in from the Lakes in the 'copter," he said. "We didn't like the silence down here and we figured that we'd better come in under our own power, instead of registering in on the regular jetliner and tipping the Lithians off -- just in case there'd been any dirty work afloat." "Stop jawing him," Michelis said, appearing suddenly, magically in the doorway. "He's got a bug, that's obvious. I don't like to feel pleased about misery, but I'm glad it's that instead of the Lithians." The rangy, long-jawed chemist helped Agronski lift Cleaver to his feet. Tentatively, despite the pain, Cleaver got his mouth open again. Nothing came out but a hoarse croak. "Shut up," Michelis said, not xmkindly. "Let's get him back into the hammock. Where's the Father? He's the only one capable of dealing with sickness here." "I'll bet hr's dead." Agronski burst out suddenly, his face glistening with alarm. "He'd be licrc if he could. It must be catching, Mike." "I didn't bring iny mitt." Michclis said drily. "Cleaver, He still or ril have to clobber you. Agronski. you seem to have dumped his water carafe ; better go get him some mire, lie needs it. And sec if the Father left anything in the lab that looks like medicine." Agronski went out, and, maddeningly, so did Michelis -- at least out of Cleaver's field of vision. Setting his every muscle against the pain, ' Cleaver pulled lus lips apart once more. "Mike." Instantly, Michelis was there. He had a pad of cotton bt'tween two fingers, wet with some solution, 'with which he gently cleaned Cleaver's lips and chin. "F.,asy. Agronski's getting you a drink. We'll let vou talk in a little while. Paul. Don't rush it." Cleaver relaxed a little. He could trust Michelis. Nevertheless, tlie vivid and absurd insult of having to be swabbed like a baby was more than he could bear; he felt tears of helpless rage swelling on either side of his nose. With two deft, noncommittal swipes, Michelis removed them. Agronski came back, holding out one hand tentatively, palm up. "I found these," he .said. "There's more in the lab, and the Father's pillpress is still out. So's his mortar and pestle, though they've been cleaned," "All right, let's have 'em," Michelis said. "Anything else?" "No. There's a syringe cooking in the sterilizer, if that means anythlng." Michelis swore briefly and to the point. "It means that there's a pertinent antitoxin in the shop someplace," he added. "But unless Ramon left notes, we'll not have a prayer of figuring out which one it is." As he spoke, he lifted Cleaver's head and tipped the pills into his mouth. The water which followed was cold at the first contact, but a split .second later it was liquid fire. Cleaver choked, and at that precise moment Michelis pinched his nastrils shut. The pills went down. "There's no sign of the Father?" Michelis said. "Not a one, Mike. Everything's in good order, and liis gear's still here. Both jungle suits are in the locker." "Maybe he went visiting," Michelis said thoughtfully. "He mu-st have gotten to know quite a few of the Lithians by now." "With a sick man on his hands? That's not like him, Mike. Not unlcss there was some kind of emergency. Or maybe he went on a routine errand, expected to be back in just a few moments, and -- " "And was set upon by trolls for forgetting to stamp his foot three times before crossing the bridge," "All right, laugh." 'Tm not laughing, believe me." "Mike... Michelis took a step back and looked down at Cleaver, his face floating as if detached through a haze of tears. He said: "All right, Paul. Tell us what it is. We're listening." But it was too late. The doubled barbiturate dose had gotten to Cleaver first. He could only shake his bead, and with the motion Michelis seemed to go reeling away into a whirlpool of fuzzy rainbows. go to sleep. He had had nearly a normal night's sleep, and he had started out the enormously long day a powerful and healthy man. The conversation of the two Earllimen and an obsessive consciousness of his need to speak to them before Ruiz-Sanchez returned helped to keep him, if not totally awake, at least not far below a state of light trance -- and the presence in his system of # grains of acetybalicylic acid had seriously raised his oxygen consumption, bringing with it not only dizziness but a precarioui, emotionally untethered alertness. That the fuel which was being burned to maintain it was largely the protein substrate of his own ceils he did not know, and it could not have alarmed him had he known it. Tlie voices continued to reach him, and to convey a little meaning. With them were mixed fleeting, fragmentary dreams, so slightly removed from the surface of his waking life as to seem peculiarly real, yet at the same time peculiarly pointless and depressing. In the semi-conscious intervals there came plans, a whole succession of them, all umple and grandiose at once, for taking command of the expedition, for communicating with the authorities on Earth, for bringing forward secret papers proving that Lithia was uninhabitable, for digging a tunnel under Mexico to Peru, for detonating Lithia in one single mighty fusion of all its light-weight atoms into an atom of cleaverium, the element whose cardinal number was a)ephnull... Agronski: Mike, come here and look at this; you read Lithian. There's a mark on the front door, on the message tablet. (Footsteps.) MictiELis: It says "Sickness inside." The strokes aren't casual or deft enough to be the work of tlie natives. Ideographs are hard to write rapidly. Ramon must have written it there. Agronski: I wish I knew where he went afterwards. (Footsteps. Door shutting, not loudly. Footsteps. Hassock creaking.) thinking about getting up a report. Unless this damn #-hour day has me thrown completely oil, our time's just about up. Are you still set on opening up the planet? Michelis: Yes. I've seen nothing to convince me that there's anytliing on Lithia that's dangerous to us. Except maybe Cleaver in there, and I'm not prepared to say that the Father would have left him if he were in any serious danger. And I don't see how Earthmen could harm this society: it's too stable emotionally, economically, in every other way. Danger, danger, said somebody in Cleaver's dream. It will explode. It's all a popish plot. Then he was marginally awake again and conscious of how his mouth hurt. ) Agronski: Why do you suppose these two jokers never called us after we went north? Michelis: I don't have any answer. I won't even ess until I talk to Ramon. Or until Paul's able to sit up and take notice. Agronski: I don't like it, Mike. It smells bad to me. This town's riht at the heart of the communications system of the planet. And yet -- no messages, Cleaver sick, the Father not here... There's a hell of a lot we don't know about Lithia. Michelis: There's a hell of a lot we don't know about central Brazil. Agronski: Nothing essential, iClike. What we know about the periphery gives us all the clues we need about the interior -- even to those fi.sh that eat people, the what are they, the pirhanas. That's not true on Lithia. We don't know vhether our peripheral clues about Lithia are germane or just incidental. Something enonnous could be hidden under the surface without our being able to detect it. Michelis: Agronski. stop sounding like a Sunday supplement. You underestimate your own intelligence. What kind of enormous secret could that be? That the Lithians eat people? That they're cattle for unknown gods that live in the jungle? That tliey're actually mindwrenching, soul-twisting, heartstopping, bowel-moving intelligences in disguise? The moment you state any such proposition, you'll deflate it yourself. I wouldn't even need to take the trouble of examining it, or discussing how we might meet it if it were true. Agronski: All right, all right, ril reserve judgment for the time being, anyhow. If everything turns out to be all right here, with the Father and Cleaver I mean, I'll probably go along with you. I don't have any reason I could defend for voting against the planet, I admit. Michelis: Good for you. I'm sure Ramon is for opening it up. so that should make it un.iniinous. I can't see why Cleaver would object. (Cleaver was testifying before a packed court convened in the UN General Assembly chambers in New York, with one finger pointed dramatically, but less in triumph than in sorrow, at Ramon Ruiz-Sanchez, S. J. At the sound of hU name the dream collapsed and he realized that the room had grown a little lighter. Dawn -- or dripping, wool-grey travesty of it which prevailed on Lithia -- was on its way. He wondered what he had just said to the court. It had been conclusive. damning, good enough to be used when he awoke; but he could not remember a word of it. All that remained of it was a sensation, almost the taste of the words, but with nothing of their substance.) Agronski: It's getting light. I suppose we'd better knock off. Michelis: Did you stake down the 'copter? The winds here are higher than they are up north, I seem to remember. Agronski: Yes. And covered it with the tarp. Nothing left to do but sling our hammocks -- Michelis: Shh. What's that? (Footsteps. Faint ones, but Cleaver knew them. He forced his eyes to open a little, but there was nothing to see but the ceiling. Its even color, and its smooth, everchanging slope into a dome of nothingness, drew him almost immediately upward into the mists of trance once more.) Agronski: Somebody's coming. It's the Father, Mike -- look out here. He seems to be all right. Dragging his feet a bit, but who wouldn't after being out helling all night? MiGitEi-is: Maybe you'd bc'tter meet him at the door. It'd probably be better than our springing out at him after he gets inside. After all he doesn't expect us. I'll get to unpacking tlie hammocks. Acronski: Sure. Mike. (Footsteps, going away from Qeaver. A grating sound of stone on stone: the door-wheel being turned.) Aoronski: Welcome home. Father! We got in just a little while ago and -- what's wrong? Arc you ill? Is there soineihing iliat -- Mike! Mike! (Somebody was running. Cleaver willed his neck muscles to lift his head, but they refused to obey. Instead, the back of his head seemed to force itself deeper into the stiff pillow of the hammock. After a momentary and endless agony he cried out.) Cleaver; Mike! Aoronski: Mike! (With a gasp, Cleaver lost the long battle at last. He was asleep.) IV house closed behind him, RuizSanchez lcx)ked about the gentlyglowing foyer with a feeling of almost unbearable anticipation, although he could hardly have said what it was that he hoped to see. Actuallv. it looked exactly like his own quarters, which was all he could in justice have expected -- all the furniture at "home" was Lithian except the lab equipment. "Wc have cut up several of the metal meteors from our museums, and hammered them as you suggested," Chrexa said behind him, while he struggled out of his raincoat and l)oots. "They show very definite, very strong inagentism, just as you predicted. We now have the whole planet alerted to pick up raeteorite.s and send them to our eiecirical laboratory here, regardless (rf where found. The staff of the observatory is attem)ting to predict possible lalls. Unhappily, meteors are rare here. Our astronomers say that we have never had a 'shower' such as you dcscrilx as frequent on your native planet." "No; I should have thought of that," Ruiz-Sanchez said, following the Lithian inu the front roora. This, too, was cjuite ordinary, and empty except for the two of them. "In our system we have a sort of giant grinding wheel -- a whole ring of little planets, many thomand.s of dicin, distributed around an orbit where we had expected to find only Nie normal-sized world. Collisions between these liodies are incessant, and our plague of meteors is the result. Here I suppose you have only the usual few strays from comets." "It is hard to understand how so unstable an arrangement could have come about," Chtexa said, sitting down and pointing out another hassock to his guest. "Have you an explanation?" "Not a good one," Ruiz-Sanchez said. "Some of us think that there was a respectable planet in that orbit ages ago, which exploded somehow. A similar accident happened to a satellite in our system -- at least one of our j)lanets has a similar ring. Others think that at the formation of our solar system the raw materials of what might have been a planet just never succeeded in coalescing. Both ideas have many flaws, but each satisfies certain objections to the other, so perhaps there is some truth in botli." Chtexa's eyes filmed with the nildly disquieting "inner blink" characteristic of Lithians at their most thoughtful. "There would seem to be no wav to test either an swer," he said at length. "By our logic, lack of such tests makes the paginal question meaningless." "That rule of logic has many adherents on Earth. My colleague Dr. Cleaver would certainly agree with it." Ruiz-Sanchez smiled suddenly. He had labored long and hard to master the Lithian language, and to have understood and recognized so completely abstract a point as the one just made by Chtexa was a bigger victory than any quantitative gains in vocabulary alone could ever have been. "But I can see that we are going to have difficulties in collecting these meteorites. Have you offered incentives? "Oh, certainly. Everyone understands the importance of the program. We are all eager to advance it." This was not quite what the priest had meant by his question. He searched his memory for some Lithian equivalent of "reward," but found nothing but the word he had already used, "incentive." He realized that he knew' no word for "greed," either. Evidently offering Lithians a hundred dollars a meteorite would simply bafilc them. Instead he said, "Since the potential meteor-fall is so small, you're not likely to get anything like the supply of metal lliat you need for a real study, no matter how thoroughly you cooperate on it. You need a supplementary iron-finding program : some way of concentrating the traces of the metal you have on the planet. Our smelting methods would be useless to you, since you have no ore-beds. Hmm. What about the iron-fixing bacteria?" "Are there such?" Chtexa said, cocking his head dubiously. "I don't know. Ask your bacteriologists. If you have any bacteria here that belong to the genus we call Leptothrix, one of them should be an iron-fixing species. In all the has had life on it, that mutation must have occurred, and probably very early." "But why have we never seen it before? We have done perhaps more research in bacteriology than we have in any other field." "Because," Ruiz-Sanchez said earnestly, "you didn't know what to look for, and because such a species would be as rare as iron itself. On Earth, because we have iron in abundance, our Leptothrix ochracea has found plenty of opportunity to grow. We find their fossil our great ore-beds. It used to bc' thought, as a matter of fact, that the bacteria produced the oi-e-beds, but Tve never believed that. While they do obtain dielr energy by oxidizing ferrous iron, such salts in solution change spontaneously to ferric salts if the oxidation-reduction potential and the pH of the water arc right -- and those arc conditions that are alTccted bv ordinary decay bacteria. On our planet the bacteria grew in the ore-beds because the iron was there, not the other way around. In your case, you just don't have the iron to make them numerous, but I'm .'ure there mast be a few." "We will start a soil-sampling program at once," Chtexa said, his wattles flaring a sulxlued orchid. "Our ajitibiotics research centers screen soil samples by the thousand.s every month, in search of new inicroflora of therapeutic importance. If these iron-fixing bacteria exist, we are certain to find them eventually." "TTiey mu.st exist," Ruiz-Sanchez repeated. "Do you have a bacteritim that i.s a sulfur-concentrating obligate anaerobe?" "S'es -- ye.s, certainly!" "There you are," the Jesuit said, leaning back contentedly and clasping hi.s hands across one knee. "You have plenty of sulfur and so you have the bacterium. Please let me know when you find tiie iron-fixing species. I'd like to make a suIkuItureand take it home with me when I leave. There are two Earthmen whose noses I'd like to rub in it." The Lithian stiffened and thnist his head forward a little, as if baffled. Ruiz-Sanchez said hastily, "Pardon me. I was translating literally an aggressive idiom of my own tongue. It was not meant to describe an actual plan of action." "I think I understand," Chtexa said. Ruiz-Sanchez wondered if he did. In the rich storehouse of the Lithian language he h.id yet to discover any metaphors, either living or dead. Neither did the Litlnans liave any poetry or other creative arts. "You are of course wclccnne to any of the results of this program which you would honor as by accepting. One problem in die social sciences which has long puzzled us is just how one may adequately honor the innovator. When we consider how new ideas change our lives, we despair of giving in kind, and it is helpful when the innovator himself has wishes which society can gratify." Ruiz-Sanchez was at first not quite sure he had understood the proposition. After he had gone over it once more in his mind, he was not .sure that he could bring himself to like it, although it wa.s admirable enough. From an Earthman it would have sounded intolerably pompous, but it wa.s evident that Chtexa meant it. It wa-s probably just as well that the Commission's rejiort on Lithia was about to fall tlue, Ruiz-Sanchez had begun to think that he could absorb only a little mbm of this kind of calm sanity. And all of it -- a disquieting thought from somewhere near hi? heart reminded him -- all of it derived from reason, none from precept, none from faith. Tlic Lithians did not know God. They did things rightly, and thought righteously, because it was reasonable and effiaent and natural to do and to think that way. They seemed to need nothing else. Or could it be that thethought and acted as they did because, not being bom of man, and never in effect having left the Garden in wliich they lived, they did not share the terrible burden of origi nal sin? The fact tliat Lithia had never once had a glacial epoch, that its climate had been left una geological fact that an alert theologist could scarcely afford to ignore. Could it be that, free from the burden, they were also free from the curse of Adam? And if they wtir -- could men Twar to live among them? you, Cljlexa," the priest said after a moment. "You owe me no debt whatsoever, but we four Earthmen have a hard decision to make shortly. You know what it is. And I don't believe that wc know enough yet about your planet to make that decision properly." "Then of course you must ask questions," Chtexa said immediately. "I will answer, wherever I can." "Well then -- do your people die? I see you have the word, but perhaps it isn't the same as our word in meaning." "It means to stop changing and to go back to existing," Chtexa said. "A machine exists, but only a living thing, like a tree, progres-ses along a line of changing equilibriums. When that progress stops, the entity is dead." "And that happens to you?" "It always happens. Even the great trees, like the Message Tree, die sooner or later. Is that not true on Earth?" "Yes," Ruiz-Sanchez said, "yes, it is. For rcMsons it would take me a long time to explain, it occurred to me that you might have escaped this evil." "It is not evil as we look at it," Chtexa said. "Lithia lives because of death. The death of leaves supplies our oil and gas. The death of some creatures is always necessary for the life of others. Bacteria must die, and viruses be prevented from living, if illness Is to be cured. Wc ourselves must die simply to make room for others, at least until wc can slow the rate at which our people arrive in the world -- a thing impossible to us at present." "But desirable, in your eyes?" "Surely desirable," Chtexa said. "Our world is rich, but not inexhaustible. And other planets, you have taught us, have peoples of their own. Tims woi cannot hope to spread to other planets when we have over-populated this one." "No real thing is ever inexhaustihle," Ruiz-Sanchez said abruptly, frowning at the iridescent floor. "That we have found to be true over many thousands of years of our history." "But inexhaustible in what way?" said Chtexa. "I grant you that any small object, any stone, any drop of water, any bit of soil can be explored without end. The amount of information which can be gotten from it is quite literally infinite. But a given soil can be exhausted of nitrates. It is difficult, but with bad cultivation it can be done. Or take iron, about which we have already been talking. Our planet's supply of iron has limits which we already know, at least approximately. To allow our economy to develop a demand for iron whieli exceeds the total known supply of Lithia -- and exceeds it beyond any possibility of supplementation by meteors or by import -- would be folly. This is not a question of information. It is a question of whether or not the information can be used. If it cannot, then limitless information is of no help." "You could certainly get along without more iron if yx)u h.ad to," Ruiz-Sanchez admitted. "Your wooden machinery is precise enough to satisfy any engineer. Most of them, I think, don't remember that we used to have something similar: I've a sample in my own home. It's a kind of tinier called a cuckoo clock, nearly two of our centuries old, made entirely of wood, and still nearly # accurate. For that matter, long after we began to build sca-going vessels of metal, we continued to use lignum vitae for ships' bearings." "Wood is an excellent material for most uses," Chtexa agreed. "Its only deficiency, compared to ceramic materials or perhaps metal, is that it is variable. One must know it well to be able to assess its qualities from one tree to the next. And of course complicated parts can always be grown inside suitable ceramic molds; the growth ressure inside the mold rises so igh that the resulting part is very dense. Larger parts can be ground direct from the plank with soft sandstone and polished with slate. It is a gratifying material to work, we find." Ruiz-Sanchez felt, for some reason, a little ashamed. It was a magnified version of the same shame he had always felt at home toward that old Black Forest cuckoo clock. The electric clocks elsewhere in his villa back home all should have been capable of performing silently, accurately and in less space -- but the considerations wliich had gone into the m akin g of them had been commercial as well as purely technical. As a result, most of them operated with a thin, asthmatic whir, or groaned softly but dismally at irregular hours. All of them were "streamlined," oversized and ugly. None of them kept good time, and several of them, since they were powered by constant-speed motors operating very simple gear-boxes, could not be adjusted, but had been sent out from the factory wnth built-in, ineluctable inaccuracies. The wooden cuckoo clock, meanwhile, ticked evenly away. A quail emerged from one of two wooden doors every quarter of an hour and let you know about it, and on the hour first the quail came out, then the cuckoo, and tliere wa.s a soft boll that rang just ahead of the cuckoo's call. It was accurate to a minute a week, all for the price of running up the three weights which drove it, each night before bedtime. The maker had been dead before Ruiz-Sanchez had been born. In contrast, the priest would probably buy and jettison at least a dozen cheap electric clocks in the course of one lifetime, as their makers had intended he should. "I have one more question, if I may. It is really part of the same question: I have asked if you die; now I should like to ask how you are born. I see many adults on your streets and sometiiTie.s in your houses -- though I gather you yourself are alone -- but never any children. Can you explain this to me? Or if the subject is not allowed to be discussed... "But why should it not be? There can never be any closed subjects," Chtexa said. "You know, of course, that our mates have abdominal po'uches where the eggs arc carried, it was a lucky mutation for us, for there arc a number of nest-robbing species on this planet." "Yes, we have a few animals with a somewhat similar arrangement on Earth, although they are live-bearers." "Our eggs are laid into these pouches once a year," Chtexa said. "It is then that the women leave their own houses and seek out the male of their choice to fertilize the eggs. I am alone because, thus far, I am no woman's first choice tliis season. In contrast you may see men's houses at this time of year which shelter three or four women who favor him." "I see," Ruiz-Sanchez said carefully. "And how is the choice determined? Is it by emotion, or by reason alone?" "The two are in the long run the same," Chtexa said. "Our ancestors did not leave our genetic needs to chance. Emotion with us no longer runs counter to our eugenic knowledge. It cannot, since it was itself modified to follow that knowledge by selective breeding for such behaviour. "At the end of the season, then, comes Migration Day. At that time all the eggs are fertilized, and ready to hatch. On that day -- you will not be here to see it, I am afraid, for your announced date of departure precedes it by a short time -- our whole nation goes to the seashores. There, witli the men to protect them from predators, the women wade out to swimming depth, and the children are bom." "In the sea?" Ruiz-Sanchez said faintly. "Yes, in the sea. Then we all return, and resume our other affairs until the next mating season." "But -- but what happens to the children?" "Why, tlicy take care of themselves, if they can. Of course many perish, particularly to our voracious brother the great fish-lizard, whom for that reason we kill when wc can. But a majority return when the time comes." "Return? Chtexa, I don't understand. Why don't they drown when they arc bom? And if they return, why have we never seen one?" "But you have," Chtexa said. "And you have heard them often. Here, come with me." He arose and led the way out into the foyer. RuizSanchez followed, hi.s head whirling with conjecture. Chtexa opened the door. The night, the priest saw with a subdued shock, was on the wane; there was the faintest of pearly glimmers on the cloudy sky to the east. The . multifarious humming and singing of the jungle contihued unabated. There was a high, hissing whistle, and the shadow of a pterodon drifted over the city toward the sea. From the mudflats came a hoarse barking. "There," Chtexa said softly. "Did you hear it?" The stranded creature, or another of his kind -- it was impossible to tell which -- croaked protestingly again. "It is hard for them at first," Chtexa said. "But actually the worst of their dangers are over. They have come ashore." "Chtexa," Ruiz-Sanchez said. "Your children -- the hngfish?' "Yes," Chtexa said. "Those are our children." V incessant barking of the lungfish which caused Ruiz-Sanchez to faint when Agronski opened the door for him. The late hour, and the dual strains of Cleaver's Illness and the subsequent discovery of Cleaver's  direct lying, contributed. So did the increasing sense of guilt toward Cleaver which the priest had felt while walking home under the gradually-brightening, weeping sky : and so, of course, did the shock of discovering that Agronski and Michelis had arrived sometime during the night while he had been neglecting his charge. But primarily it was the diminishing, gasping clamor of the children of Lithia, battering at his every mental citadel, all the way from Chtexa's house to his own. The sudden fugue only lasted a few moments. He fought his way back to consciousness to find that Agronski and Michelis had propped him up on a stool in the lab and were tiying to remove his macintosh without unbalancing him or awakening him -- as difficult a problem in topology as removing a man's vest without taking off his jacket. Wearily, the priest pulled his own arm out of a macintosh sleeve and looked up at Michelis. "Good morning, Mike. Please excuse my bad manners." "Don't be an idiot," Michelis said evenly. "You don't have to talk now, anyhow. I've already spent much of tonight trying to keep Cleaver quiet until he's better. Don't put me through it again, Ramon, plea.se." "I won't. I'm not ill; I'm just very tired and a little overwrotight." "What's the matter with Cleaver?" Agronski demanded. Michelis made as if to shoo him off. "No, no, Mike, I'm all right, I assure you. ,s for Paul, he got a dose of glucoside poisoning when a plant-spine stabbed him this afternoon. No, it's yesterday afternoon now. How has he been since, you arrived?" "He's sick," Michelis said. "Since you weren't here, we didn't know what to do. We settled for two of the pills you'd left out." "You did?" Ruiz-Sanchez slid his feet heavily to the floor and tried to stand up. "As you say, you couldn't have known what else to do, but I think I'd better look in on him -- " "Sit down, please, Ramon." Michelis spoke gently, but his tone showed that he meant the request to be honored. Obscurely glad to be forced to yield to the big man's well-meant implacability, the priest let himself be propped back on the stool. His boots fell off his feet to the floor. "Mike, who's the Father here?" he said tiredly. "Still, I'm sure you've done a good job. lie's in no apparent danger?" "Well, he seems very sick. But he had energy enough to keep himself half awake most of the night. He only passed out a short while ago." "Good. Let him stay out. Tomorrow we'll probably have to begin intravenus feeding, though. In this atmosphere one doesn't give a salicylate overdose without penalties." He sighed. "Can we put off further questions?" "If there's nothing else wrong here, of course we can." "Oh," Ruiz-Sanchez said, "there's a great deal wrong, I'm afraid." "I knew it," .Agronski said. "I knew damn well there was. I told you so, Mike, didn't I?" "Is it urgent?" "No, Mike -- there's no danger to us, of at I'm positive. It's nothing that won't keep until we've all had a rest. You two look as though you need one as badly as I." "We're tired," Michelis agreed. "But why didn't you ever call us?" Agronski burst in aggricvcdly. "You had us scared half to death. Father. If there's really something wrong here, you should have -- " "There's no immediate danger," Ruiz-Sanchez repeated patiently. "As for why we didn't call you, I don't understand that any more than you do. Up to tonight, I thought we were in regular contact with you both. That was Paul's job and he seemed to be carrying it out. I didn't discover that he wasn't doing it until after he became ill." "Then obviously we'll have to wait," Michelis said. "Let's hit the hammock, in God's name. Flying that 'copter through twenty-five hundred miles of fog-bank wasn't exactly restful, either; I'll be glad to turn in... But, Ramon -- " "Yes, Mike?" "I have to say that I don't like this any better than Agronski does. Tomorrow we've got to clear it up. and get our Ccm:imission basincss done. We've only a day or so to make our decision before the ship comes and takes us off for good, and by that time we must know everything there is to know, and just what we're going to tell the Earth about it." "Yes," Ruiz-Sanchez said. "Just as you say, Mike -- in God's name." gist awoke before the otlicrs : actually, he had undergone far less purely physical strain than had the other three. It was just beginning to be cloudy dusk when he rolled out of his hammock and padded over to look at Cleaver. The physicist was in coma. His face was dirty grey and looked oddly shrunken. It was high time that the neglect and inadvertent abmc to which he had been subjected was rectified. Happily, his pulse and respiration were close to normal now. Ruiz-Sanchez went quietly into the lab and made up a fructose IV feeding. At tlie same time he reconstituted a can of powdered egg into a sort of souffle, setting it in a covered crucible to bake at the back of die little oven; that was for the rest of them. In the sleeping chamber, the priest set up his IV stand. Cleaver did not stir when the needle entered the big vein just above tlie inside of his elbow. Ruiz-Sanchez taped the tubing in place, checked the drip from the inverted bottle, and went back into the lab. There he sat, on the stool before the microscope, in a sort of suspension of feeling while the new night drew on. He was still poisonedtired, but at least now he could stay awake without constantly fighting himself. The slowdy-rising souffle in the oven went plup-plup, plup-plup, and after a while a thin tendril of aroma suggested that it was beginning to brown on top, or at Ica.st thinking about it. Outside, it abruptly rained buckets. Just as abruptly, it stopjjcd. "Is that breakfa.st I smell, Ramon?" "Yes, Mike, in the oven. In a few minutes now." "Right." Michelis went away again. On the back of the workbench, RuizSancJiez saw the dark blue book with the gold stamping which he had brought with him all the way from Earth. Almost automatically he pulled it to him and opened it to page #. It would at least ve him something to think about with which he was not personally involved. He had quitted the text last with Anita, who "would yield to tlie lewdness of Honuphrius to appease the savagery of Sulla and the mercenariness of the twelve Sullivani, and (as Gilbert first suggested), to save the virginity of Felicia for Magravius" -- now hold a moment, how could Felicia be considered still a virgin at this point? Ah:... when converted bv Michael ered it. since Felicia had been guilty only of simple infidelities in the finst place. "... but .she fears that, by allowing his marital rights, she may cause reprehensible conduct between Rugenius and Jereinias. Michael, who has foinurly debauched .Anita, dispenses her from yielding to Honupitrius" -- yes. that figured, since Michael also had had designs on Eugenius. "Anita is disturbed, hut Michael comminates that he will reserve her case tomorrow for the ordinary Gugliclinus even if .slie should practise a pious fraud during afTriction which, from experience, she knows (according to Wadding) to he leading to nullity." Well. This was all very well. It even seemed to be shaping up, for the first time. Still, Ruiz-Sandiez reflected, he would not like to have known the familv hidden beJtind the conventional Latin alia.ses, or to have lxen the confessor to any' one of them. Now then: "Fortissa, liowever, is encouraged by Gregorius, Leo. Viteilius, and Macdugalius, reunitedly, to warn Anita by describing the strong chastisements of Honuphrius and the depravities ( turpissimas) of Canicula, the deceased wife of Mauritius, with Sulla, the simoniac, who is abnegand and repents.' Yes, it added up, when one tried to view it without outrage either at the persons involved -- and there was every assurance that these were fictitious -- or at the author, who for all his mighty intellect, the greatest perhaps of the preceding century among novelists, had still to be pitied as much as the meanest victim of the Evil One. To view it, as it were, in a sort of grey twilight of emotion, wherein everything, even the bamacle-like commentaries which the text had accumulated, could be seen in the same light. "Is it done. Father?" "Smells like it, Agromki. Take it out and help yourself, why don't you?" "Thanks. Can I bring Cleaver -- " "No, he's fitting an IV." Unless his impression that he understood the problem at last was once more going to turn out to be an illusion, he was now ready for the basic question, the stumper that had deeply disturbed both the Order and the Church for so many years now. He reread it carefully. It asked: "Has he hegemony and shall she submit?" To his astonishment, he saw as if for the first time that it was two questions, despite the omission of a comma between the two. And so it demanded two an.swers. Did Honuphrius have hegemony? Yes, he did, for Michael, the onlv member of the # # whole complex who had been gifted from the beginning with the power of grace, had been egregiously compromised. Therefore, Honuphrius regardless of whether his dns were all to be laid at his door or were real only in rumor could not be divested of his privileges by anyone. But should Anita submit? No, she should not Michael had forfeited his right to dispense or to reserve her in any way, and so she could not be guided by the curate or by anyone else in tlic long run but her own conscience -- which in view of the grave accusations against Honuphrius could lead her to no recourse but to deny him. As for Sulla's repentance, and Felicia's conversion, they meant nothing, since the defection of Michael had deprived both of them, and everyone else, of spiritual guidance. The answer, then, had been obvious all the time. It was: Yes, and No. H e closed the book and looked up across the bench, feeling neither more nor less dazed than he had before, but with a small stirring of elation deep inside him which he could not suppress. As he looked out of the window into the dripping darkness, a familiar, sculpturesque head and shoulders moved into the truncated tetrahedron of yellow light being cast out through the fine glass into the rain. It was Chtexa, moving away from the house. Suddenly Ruiz-Sanchez realized that nobody had bothered to rub away the ackness ideograms on the door-tablet. If Chtexa had come here on some errand, he had been turned back unnecessarily. The priest leaned forward, snatched up an empty s!idebox, and rapped with a comer of it against the inside of the window, Chtexa turned and looked in through the steaming curtains of rain, his eyes completely filmed. Ruiz-Sanchez beckoned to him. and got stifTly off the stool to open the door. In the oven his share of breakfast dried slowly and began to bum. The rapping had summoned forth Agronski and Michelis as well. Chtexa looked down at the three of them with easy gravity', while drops of water ran like oil down the minute, prismatic scales of his supple skin. "I did not know that there was sickness here," the Lithian said. "I called because your brother RuizSanchez left my house this morning without the gift I had hoped to give him. I will leave if I am invading your privacy in any way." "You are not," Ruiz-Sanchez assured him. "And the sickness is only a poisoning, not communicable and w'e think not likely to end badly for our colleague. These are my friends from the north, Agronski and Michelis." "I am happy to see them. The message was not in vain, then?" "What message is this?" Michelis said, in his pure but hesitant Lithian. "I .sent a message, as your colleague Ruiz-Sanchez asked me to do, last night. I was told by Xoredeshch Gton that you had already departed." "As we had," Michelis said. "Ramon, what's this? I thought you told us that sending messages was Paul's job. And you certainly implied that you didn't know how to do it after Paul took sick." "I didn't. I don't. I asked Chtexa to send it for me." Michelis looked up at the Lithian. "What did the message say?" he asked. "That you were to join them now, here, in Xoredeshch Sfath. And that vour time on our world was almost up." "What does that mean?" Agronski said. He had been trying to follow the conversation, but he was not much of a linguist, and evidently the few words he had been able to pick up had served only to inflame his ready fears. "Mike, translate, please." Michelis did so. bricRy. Then he said : "Ramon, wa.s that really all you had to say to us, especially after whai you had found out? We knew Uiat departure time was coming, too, after all. We can keep a calendar as well as you, I hope." "I know that, Mike. But I had no idea what previous messages you'd received, if indeed you'd received any. For all I knew. Cleaver might have been in touch with you some other vvay, privately. I tliought at first of a transmitter in his personal lugggc. but later it occurred to me that he might have been sending dispatihes over the regular jetliners. Or he miglit have told you that we were going to stay on beyond the official time. He might have told you I was dead. He might have told you anything. I had to be sure you'd arrive here regardless of w-hat he had or had not said. "And when I got to the local rtK'ssapi' center, I luicl to revise my message again, because I found that I couldn't coiiiniimicate with you directly, or send anytfiing at all detailed. Eveiylhing that goes out from Xoredeluh Sfaiii bv radio # goes out through the I iee. and until you've seen it vou haven't any idea what an Karthiiian is up against there in sending even the simplest message." "Is that true?" Miehelis asked Chtexa. "True?" Chtexa repeated. "It is accurate, yes." "Well, then," Ruiz-Sanchez said, a little nettled, "you can see why, w'hcn Chtexa appeared providentially. recognized me. and ofTcred to act as an intiTinediarv. I htid to give him only tlic gist of what I hid to say. I couldirt ho)e to explain all the clei.iils to him. am! I couldn't li('pe that any of those details would get to you undisioited aifter passing thiougli at least two do was yell al the loj) of niv voice for you two to get down here on the pioper date .incl hope that you heard ine." "Thi' is a time of lioublc. uhidt is lik" a siiknevs in the hni--e." Chtexa said. "I nui't not remain. am troubled, and I lamiol ask lltat, if I now force my jresence on other. wiio are troubled. I will bring my gift at a better lime." door, without any formal gesture of fari'well, but neverthclc? leaving beiiind an overwhelming impression of grariousness. Ruiz.Sanchez w.ilclied liim go helplessly, and a little forlornly. The Lithian.s always seemed to understand the cbseiiLes of situations ; lliey were never, like een the most cocksure of Eariiimen. beset by the least apparent doubt. And why sliould they be? They were backed-if Ruiz.-Sanchez was right -- bv the second-best Authority in the universe, and backed directly, without intermediaries or con(licting interpretations. The very fact that they were never tonnenlcd by indet'ision identified them as creatures of that Autliority. Only tlic ( hildren of God had been gi'en free choice, and hence were often doubtful. Nevertheless, Ruiz-Sanchez would have delaved Chtexa's dcpartuic had he been able. In a short-term argument it is heljiful to have pure reason on your side -- even though such an ally could be di'pended upon to Stab you to the heart If you depended upon him too long. "Let's go inside and lhra.sh this thing out," Michclis said, shutting the door and turning back toward the front room. "It's a good thing we got some sleep, but we have so little time left now that it's going lo be touch and go to have a formal decision ready when the sliip comes." "We can't go ahead yel," Agronski objected, although, along with Ruiz-Sam lie. be followed Michclis obediently enough. "How can we do anything .wnsible without having heard what Cleaver has to say? Every inan'.s voice counts on a job of this sort." "That's verv true." Michelis said. "And I don't like the present situation any better than you do -- I've already said that. But I don't see tliat wc have any choice. VN'hat do you think, Ramon?" "I'd like to hold out for waiting," Ruiz-Sanchez said frankly. "Anything I may say now is, to put it realistically, somewhat compromised with vou two...nd don't tell me that you have every confidence in my integrity, becau.se we had every confidence in Cleavcr'.s, too. Right now, trying to maintain both confidences just cancels out both." "You have a nastv wav, Ramon, of saying aloud what everybody else is thinking," Michelis said, grinning bleakly. "What alternatives do you sec, then?" "None," Ruiz-Sanchez admitted. "Time is against us, a. you said. We'll ju.st have to go ahead without Cleaver." "No, you won't." Tlic voice, from the doorway to the sleeping chamber, was at once both uncertain and much harshened by weakness. The others sprang up. Cleaver, clad only in his shorts, stood in the doorway, clinging to both sides of it. On one forearm Ruiz-Sanchez could see the marks where the ad. hesive tape which iiad held the IV tubing had been ripped otf. VI chelis said, almost angrily. "Get back into your hammock before you make things twice as bad for yourself. You're a sick man, can't you realize that?" "Not as sick as I look," Cleaver said, with a ghastly grin. "Actually I feel pretty fair. My mouth is almost all cleared up and I don't think I've got any fever. And I'll be damned if this Commission is going to proceed an inch without me. It isn't empowered to do it, and I'll appeal any decision -- any decision, I hope you guys are listening -- that it makes without me." The other two turned helplessly to Ruiz-Sanchez. "How about it, Ramon?" Michclks .said, frowning. "Is it safe for him to be up like this?" Ruiz-Sanchez was already at the physicist's side, peering into his mouth. The ulcers were indeed almost gone, with granulation tissue forming nicely over the few that still remained. Cleaver's eves were f still slightly suffused, indicating that the toxemia was not completely defeated, but except for these two signs the effect of the accidental squill inoculation was no longer visible. It was true that Cleaver looked awful, but that was inevitable in a jnan recently quite sick, and in one who had been burning his own body proteins for fuel to boot. "If he wants to kill himself, I guess he's got a right to do so, at least bv indirection." Ruiz-Sanchez said. "Paul, the first tiling you'll have to do is get off your feet, and get into a robe, and get a blanket around your legs. Then you'll have to eat something: I'll fix it for you. You've staged a w'ondcrful recovery, but you're a sitting duck for a real infection if you abuse yourself during convalescence." "I'll compromise," Cleaver said immediately, "I don't want to be a hero, I juht want to be hoard. Give me a liand ocr to that hasso'k. I still don't walk very stiailil." It took the better part of half an hour to get Cleaver settled to RuizSanehez' .satisfaction. 'I'he physicist secnitd in a way way to be enjoying every minute of it. At last he had a mug of gchtciii, the local equivalent of tea, in his hand, and Michelis said: "Ml right, Paul, you've gone out of your way to put yourself on the spot. FiVidcntly tliat's where you want to he. So let's have the answer: Why didn't you communicate with usi"' "I didn't want to." "Now wait a minute," .gr # n # ki said. "Paul, don't break your neck to say the first damn tiling that conies into your head. Your judgment may not be well yet, even if your lalkiiiL" apparatus Is. Wasn't your sileriee ju.st a matter of your being unable to work the local message system -- the Tree or whatever it IS?" No, it wasn't." Cleav'r insisted. "Thanks, Agroiwki, hut I don't need to be sheplierded down the safe and easy road, or have any alibis set up for me. I know exactiv what I dill that was tickiidi, ;ud I know that it's going to Iw impossible to s't up consistent nlilLs for it now. My chances for keeping anything under my hat depended on rny staying in complete control of everything I did. Naturally those cliances went out the window when I got stuck bv that damned pineapple. I realized that last night, when I fought like a demon to get through to you before the Father could get back, and found that I couldn't make il." "You seem to take it calmly enough now," Miehelis observed. "Well, I'm feeling a little washed mt. But Fin a realist. And I also know, Mike, that I had damned giH'd leasons for what I did. I'm counting on llic chance that you'll agree with me wholeheartedly when I tell you why I did it." "All right," Miehelis said, "begin." hands quietly in the lap of his robe. He was obviously still enjoying the situation. He said: "First of all, I didn't call you because I didn't sant to, as I said, I could have mastored the problem of the Tree e;isily enough by doing what the F'atlier did -- that i.s, by getting a Sn.ike to ferry my messages. Of course T don't speak Snake, but tlie Father does, so all I had to do was to take him into mv conlide:H'C. B:trr;ng that. I could have mastered tlie Tree itself. I already know all the technical principles involved. Mike, you should sec that Tree, it's the biggest single junction transistor anyw'here in this galaxy, and I'll bet that it's the biggest one anywhere. "But I wanted a gap to spring up between our party and yours. I wanted both of vou to be comlelelv in the dark about what was going on. down here on this continent. I wanted you to imagine the worst, and blame it on the Snakes, too, if that could be managed. After you got here -- if you did -- I was going to be able to sliow you tliat I hadn't sent any messages because the Snakes wouldn't let me. I've got more plants to that effect squirrelled away around here than I'll bother to list now; tliere'd be no point in it, since it's all come to nothing. But I'm sure it would have looked conclusive, regardless of anything the Father would liave been able to offer to the contrary. "It was just a damned sliaine, from my point of view, tliat I had to run up against a pineapple at the last minute. It gave the Father a chance to find out something about what was up. I'll swear that if that hadn't happened, he wouldn't have smelt anything until you actually got here -- and then it would have been too late." "I probably wouldn't have, that's true," Ruiz-Sanchez said, watching Cleaver steadily. "But your running up against that 'pineapple' was no accident. If you'd been observing Lithia as you were sent here to do, instead of spending all your time building up a fictitious Lithia for purposes of your own, you'd have known enough about the planet to have been more careful about 'pineapples.' You'd also have spoken at least as much Lithian a.s Agronski by this time." "That," Cleaver said, "is probably true, and again it doesn't make any difference to me. I observed the one fact about Lithia that ovArides all oilier facts, and that is going to turn out to be sufficient. Unlike you, Fatlicr, I have no respect for petty niceties in extreme situations, and I'm not the kind of man who Uiinks anyone Icaras anything from analysis after the fart." "Let's not get to bickering," Michclis said. "You've told us your story without any visible decoration, and it's c'ident that you have a reason for confessing. You expect us to excuse you, or at least not to blame you too heavily, when you tell us what tliat reason is. Let's hear it." "It's this," Cleaver said, and for the first time he seemed to beome a little more anitnateci. He leaned forward, the "lowinc; e;aiicht brinsiing the bone?, of liis f.n e into sh.iip contrast with the s.ii'tinn hollows of his checks, and pointed a not-iiuiU"-steadv finper at Michelis. "Do you know, Mike, what it is that we're .sitting on here:' Do vou kiiojv, just to bepin with, how much rutile ihmis heie';'" "Of course I know. (I we decitle to vote for openinp the planet up. our titanium problem will be Solved for a centur', niashe even loiiper. Tm saying as inudi in my persoiuil report. But wfigured tliat that would be true even before we fir.'t landed bet', a. soon as wr got accurate figures on the mass oi' the planet." "And what about the pegmatite?" Cleaver demanded s)ftly. looking puled. "I Mippose it'.s abimclnnt: I reallv didn't bother to look. Titanium's important to us, hut T don't uitc see whv lithium should be; the (lavs wlvn the metal was used as n rocket tm-l are fifty years lit-hincl us." "And v('t (he stuT's slid worth alirmt .# an r.iigli'h tonne hack home. Mike, ami that's exactly the same price it was drawing in the IPfiO'i. allinving for cnirrencv cliangcs since then. Doesn't that nie.an anything to vou?" "I'm more interested in what it means to you," Mi(helis said. "None of us can make a nickel out of this trip, even if we find the planet solid platinum inside -- which is hardly likclv. And if price is the only consideration, surely the fact that lithium is common here will break the market for it? What's it gK)d for, after all, on a large scale.'" "It's good for bombs." Cleaver said. "Fusion bombs. And, of course, controlled fusiem low'cr, if vve ever lick that problem." sick and tired all over again. It was exactly what he had feared had been on Cleaver's n;ind. and he had not wanted to find himself right. "Cleaver," he said, "Fve changed my mind I would have caught vou out, even if you had never blundncd against your 'pineapple.' That same day you mentioned to me that you were looking for pegmatite wlicn vou had your accident, and that you thought Lithia miglit be a good place for tritium produi tion on a large scale. Evidently you lliought that I wouldn't know what vou were talkI ing about. If you hadn't hit the 'pineapple.' you would have given voursoif awav to me before now bv talk like that; your e.stiinale of me was ba.sed on as little observation as is vour etin I ate of Idthia." "It's easy," Cleaver observed indulgently, "to say 'I knew it all the time.' " "Of course it's easy, when the other man is helping you." RuizSanchez said. "But I think that your view of Eithia as a cornucopia of potential hydrogen bombs is only the beginning of what you have in mind. I don't believe that it's even your real olijcctive. What you would like most is to see Lithia removed from the universe as far as you're concerned. You hate the place, it's injured you, you'd like to think that it really doesn't exist. Hence the emphasis, on Lilhia as a source of tritium, to the exclusion of every other fact about the planet; for if that emphasis wins out, Lithia will be placed under security seal. Isn't tliat right?" "Of course it's right, except for the phony mind-reading," Cleaver said contemptuously. "When even a priest can see it, it's got to be obvious. Mike, this is the most tremendous opportunity that man's order to be converted, root and branch, into a thermonuclear laboratory and production center. It has indefinitely large supplies of the most important raw materials. What's even more important, it ha.s no nuclear knowledge of its own for us to worry about. All the clue materials, the radioactive elements and so on which you need to work out real knowledge of the atom, we'll have to imort; the Snakes don't know a thing about them. Furthermore, the instruments involved, the counters and particle-accelerators and so on, all depend on materials like iron that the Snakes don't have, and on principles they don't know, like magnetism to begin with, and quantum theory. We'll be able to stock our plant here with an immense reservoir of cheap labor which doesn't know and -- if we take proper precautions -- never will have a prayer of learning enough to snitch classified techniques. "All we need to do is to turn in a tripIe-E Unfavorable on the planet to shut off for a whole century any use of Lithia as a way station or any other kind of general base. At the same time, we can report separately to tlie UN Review Committee exactly what we do have in Lithia: a tripIe-A arsenal for the whole of Earth, for the whole commonwealth of planets we control!" "Against whom?" Ruiz-Sanchez said. "What do vou mean?" "Against whom are you stocking this arsenal ? Why do we need a whole planet devoted to making tritium bombs?" "The UN itself can use weapons," Cleaver said drily. "The time isn't very far gone since there were still a few restive nations on Earth, and it could come around again. Don't forget also that thermonuclear weapons only la.st a few years -- they can't be stockpiled indefinitely, like fission bombs. The halflife of tritium is very short. I suppose you w'ouldn't know anything about tlTat. But take my w'ord for it, the UN's police would be glad to know that they could have access to a virtually ine.xhaustible stock of tritium bombs, and to hell with the shelf-life problem! "Besides, if you've Uiought about it at all, you know as well as I do that this endless con.solidation of peaceful planets can't go on forever. Sooner or later -- well, what happens if the next planet we touch on is a place like Earth? If it is, its inhabitants may fight, and fight like a planetful of madmen, to stay out of our frame of influence. Or what happens if the next planet we hit is an outpost for a whole federation, maybe bigger than ours? When that day comes -- and It will, it's in the caids -- we'll be damned glad if we're able to plaster the enemy from pole to pole the matter with as little loss of lile as possible." "On our side." Rui-Sanclie added. "Is there any oilier side;'" "By golly, it makes sens(o me." .Agrtnski said. "Mike, what do vou think?" "I'm not sure yet," Michelis said. "Paul, I still don't understand why you thought it necessary to go through all the cloakand-ilagger maneuvers. 'ou tell your story fairly enough now, and it has its merits, but you also admit you were going to trick the three of us into going along with you, if you could. Why? Couldn't you trust the force of your argument alone?" "No," Cleaver said bluntly. never b"en on a Commission like this before, where there was no single, definite litairman. where there was deliberatelv an even number of mrnibcrs o dial a split opinion couldn't be settled if it occurred -- and wIktc the voice of a man whose head is full ff jiecksnifRan. irrelevant moral distinctions and two-tliousand-Ycar-old metaphysics carries c.xai l!' the same weight as the voice of a scientist." "That's mightv loaded language," Michelis said. "I know it. If it comes to that. I'll say here or anywhere that I think the Father is a hcl! of a fine biologist, and that that makes him a scientist like the rest of us -- insofar as biology's a science. "But I runemiMT once casting tile lab.s at Notre D.mie, where the have a coniph'te lif.le world ol genn-liee aiiim.d-i .ind plants and have pulled I ilon't knovv hovs many plissiological miracles out ol tile h.itI wondered then how one goe.s atioiii being as good a scientist as iImi. and a Churcliman at the same lime. I wondered in which com).irtment in their hraiiw tlicy filed tlioir religion, and in which their .science. Pm still vondering. "I didn't propose to take chances on tlie compartnienls getting interconnected on Lithia. I had every intention of cutting the Father down to a point where his voice would be nearly ignored by the rest of you. That's why I undertook the cloak-and-dagger stufl'. Maybe it vas stupid of me-I suppose lliat it takes training to be a su-ce.s.sful agenl-mvocaleur and that I sliould have realized it. Bui I'm not .sori I tried. J'm ouly Sony I faiU-dr silence. "Is that it. then?" Michelis said. "That's it, Mike. Oh -- one more tiling. Mv vote, if anvbodv is in doubt about it, is to keep the planet closed. 'I'.ike it from there." "Ramon." Michelis said, "do you want to speak next? 'ou'e ccrtainlv entitled to it the air's a mite murky at die moment." "No, Mike; let's lu-ar from you." "I'm not ready to speak, yet either, unless the majority wants me to. AgronsJd, how about you?" "Sure," Apronski said. "Speaking as a geologist, and also as an ondinary slob that doesn't follow rarified rvasoning very well, I'm on Cleaver's side. I dcwi't .sec anything either for or against the planet on any other grounds but Cleaver's. It's a fair planet as planets go, very quiet, not very rich in anything else we need, not subject to any kind of trouble that I've been able to detect. It'd make a good way station, but .so would lots of other worlds hereabouts. It'd also make a good arsenal, the way Cleaver defined the term. In every other category it's as dull as ditch-water, and it's got plenty of that. The only other thing it can have to offer is titanium, which isn't quite a.s scarce back home these days as Mike seems to think, and gem-stones, particularly the semi-precious ones, which we can make at home without traveling # light-years. I'd say, either set up a way station here and forget about the planet otherwise, or else handle the place a.s Cleaver suggested." "But which?" Ruiz-.Sanchez asked. "Well, which is more important, Father? Aren't way stations a dime a dozen? Planets that can be used as thermonuclear labs, on the other hand, are rare -- Lithia is the first one that can be used that way, at least in my experience. Why use a planet for a routine purpose if it can be used for a unique purpose? Why not apply Occam's Razor -- the law of parsimony? It works in all other scientific problems. It's iny bet that it's the best tool to use on this one." You vote to close the planet, then," Michelis said. "Sure. That's what I was saying, wasn't it?" "I wanted to be certain." Michelis said. "Ramon, I gues.s it's up to us. Shall I speak first?" "Of course, Mike." "Then," Michelis said evenly, and without changing in the slightest his accustomed tone of grave impartiality, "I'll say that I think both of these gentlemen are fools, and calamitous fools at that because they're supposed to be scientists. Paul, your maneuvers to set up a phony situation are perfectly beneath contempt, and I shan't mention them again. I shan't even bother to record them, so you needn't feel tliat you have to mend any fences as far as I'm concerned. I'm looking solely at the purpose those maneuvers were supposed to serve, just as you asked me to do." Cleaver's obious self-satisfaction began to dim a little around the edges. He said, "Go ahead," and wound the blanket a little bit tighter around his legs. L ithia is not even the beginning ' of an arsenal," Michelis .said. "Every piece of evidence you offered to prove that it might be is either a half-truth or the purest tra.sh. Cheap labor, for instance; with what w'ill you pay the Lithians? They have no money, and they can't Ije rewarded with goods. They have ewrything they n(ed, and they like the way they're living right now -- God knows they're not even slightly jealous of the achievements we think make Earth great." He looked around the gently rounded room, shining softly in the gaslight. "I don't seem to see anyplace in here where a vacuun;cleaner would find much use. Howwill you pay the Lithians to work 'in your ihennonuclear plants ?" "With knowledge," Cleaver said gruffly. "#'here's a lot they'd like to know." "But what knowledge? The things they'd like to know are specifically the things you can't tell them if ihev're to be valuable to you as a labor force. Are you going to teach tlicm quantum theor'? You can't; tliat would bo dangerous. Are you going to teach them elcctrodsTiamics? Again, tliat would enable them to learn other things you think dangerous. Are you going to teach them how to get titanium from ore, or how to accumulate enough iron to enable them to leave their present Stone Age? Of course you aren't. As a matter of fact, we haven't a thing to offer tliein in that sense. They just won't work for us under those terms." "Offer them other tenns," Cleaver said .shortly. "If necessjiry, tell them what they're going to do, like it or lump it. It'd he easy enough to introduce a money system on tliis planet: you give a Snake a piece of paper that says it's worth a dollar, and if he asks you just what makes it worth a dollar -- well, the answer Is, We say it is." "And we put a machine-pistol to his belly to emphasize the point," Ruiz-Sanchez interjected. "Do we make machine-pistols for nothing? I never figured out what else they were good for. Either you point them at someone or you throw them awav." "Item: sljvcry," Michclis said. gument for (heap labor. I won't vote for slavery. Ramon won't. Agronski?" "No," Agronski said uneasily. "But it's a minor point." "The hell it is. It's the reason why we're here. We're supposed to think of the welfare of the Lithians as well as of ourselves -- otherwise this Cominis.sjon procedure would be a waste of time, of thought, of money. If we want cheap lalwr, we can enslave any planet." Agronski was silent. "Speak up," Michelis said stonily. "Is that tnic, or isn't it?" Agronski .said, "I gucs.s it is.' "Cleaver?" "Slavery's a swearword," Cleaver said sullenly. "You're deliberately clouding the issue." Say that aii,aw' "Oh, hell. All right, Mike, T know you wouldn't. But you're wrong." "I'll admit that the instant that you ran demonstrate it to me," Michelis said. He got up abruptly from his hassock, walked over to the sloping windowsill, and sat down again, looking out into the rain-stippled darkness. He seemed to be more deeply troubled than Ruiz-Sanchez had ever before thought possible for him. suraed, "I'll go on with my own demonstration. Now whats to be said about this theory of automatic security that you've propounded, Paul? You think that the Lithians can't learn the techniques they would need to be able to understand secret information and pass it on, and so they won't have to be screened. There again, you're wrong, as you'd have known if you'd bothered to study the Lithians even perfunctorily. The Lithians are highly intelligent, and they already have many of the clues they need. I've given them a hand toward pinning down magnetism, and they absorbed the material like magic and put it to work with enormous ingenuity." "So did #," Ruiz-Sanchez said. "And I've suggested to them a technique for accumulating iron that should prove to be pretty powerful. I had only to suggest it, and they were already halfway down to the bottom of it and traveling fast. They can make the most of the smallest of clues." "If I were the UN I'd regard both actions as the plainest kind of treason," Cleaver said harshly. "Since that may be exactly the way Earth will regard them, I think it'd be just as well if you told the folks at home that the Snakes found out bodi items by themselves." "I don't plan to do any falsifying of the report," Michelis said, "but thanks anyhow -- I appreciate the intent behind what you say, if not the ethics. I'm not through, however. So far as the actual, practical objective that you want to achieve is concerned, Paul, I think it's just as useless as it is impossible. The fact that you have here a planet that's especially rich in lithium doesn't mean that you're sitting on a bonanza, no matter what price per tonne the metal is commanding back home. The fact of the matter is that you can't ship lithium home. "Its density is so low that you couldn't send away more than a tonne of it per shipload; by the time you got it to Earth the shipping charges on it would more than outweigh the price you'd get for it on arrival. As you ought to know, tliere's lots of lithium on Earth's own moon, too, and it isn't economical to fly it back to Earth even over that short distance. No more would it be economical to ship from Earth to Lithia all the heavy equipment that would be needed to make use of lithium here. By the time you got your cyclotron and the rest of your needs to Lithia, you'd have cost the UN so much money that no amount of locally available pegmatite could compensate for it." "Just extracting the metal would cost a fair sum," Agronski said, frowning slightly. "Lithium would bum like gasoline in this atmosphere." Michelis looked from Agronski to Cleaver and back again. "Of course it would," he said. "The whole plan's just a chimfira. It seems to me, also, that we have a lot to learn from the Lithians, as well as they from us. Their social system works like the most perfect of our physical mechanisms, and it does so without any apparent repression of the individual. It's a thoroughly liberal society, that nevertheless never even begins to tip over toward the other side, toward the kind of Ghandiism that keeps a people tied to the momma-andpoppa-farm and the roving-brigand economy. It's in balance, and not precarious balance, either, but per feet chemical equilibrium. "The notion of using Litliia as a tritium bomb plant is easily the strangest anachronism Tve ever encountered -- it's as crude as pro posing to equip a spaceship with canvas sails. Right here on Lithia is the real secret, the secret that's going to make bombs of all kinds, and all the re.st of the anti-social armamentarium, as useless, unnecessary, obsolete as the Iron Boot! "And on top of all that -- no, please, Trn not quite finished, Paul -- on top of all that, the Lithians are centuries aJicad of us in some purely technical matters, just as we're ahead of them in others. You should see what they can do with ceramics, with semi-conductors, with static electricity, with mixed disciplines like histochemistry, immunochemistry, biophysics, teratology, elcctrogcnetics, linmolog', and half a hundred more. If vou'd been looking, you would have seen. "We have much more to do, it seems to me, than just vote to open the planet. That's a passive move. We have to realize that bt'ing able to use Lithia is only the beginning. The fact of the matter is that we actively need Lithia. We should say so in our recommendation." the windoss-sill and stood up, looking down on them all, but most especially at Ruiz-Sanchez. The priest smiled at him. but as much ii anguish as in admiration, and then had to look back at his shoes. "Well, .'Xgronski?" Cleaver said, spitting the words out like bullets on which he had been clenching his teeth during an amputation without anesthetics. "What do you say now? Do you like the pretty picture?" "Sure, I like it," Agronski said, slowly but forthrightly. It was a virtue in him, as well as it was often a source of exasperation, that he always said exactly what he was thinking, the moment he was asked to do so. "Mike makes sense; I wouldn't expect him not to, if you see what I mean. Also he's got another advantage: he told us what he thoul without trying first to trick us into liis way of thinking." "Oh, don't be a thumphead," Cleaver exclaimed. "Are we scientists or Boy Rangers? Any rational man up against a majority of dogooders would have taken the same precautions that I did." "Maybe," Aonski said. "I don't know. They .still smell to me like a confession of weakness somewhere in the argument. I don't like to be finessed. And I don't much like to be called a thumphead, either. But before you call me any more names, I'm going to say that I think you're more right than Mike is, I don't like your methods, but your aim seems sensible to me. Mike's shot some of your major arguments full of holes, that I'll admit; but as far as I'm concerned, you're still leading -- by a nose." He paused, breathing heavily and glaring at the physicist. Then he said: "But don't push, Paul. I don't like being pushed." Michelis remained standing for a moment longer. Then he shrugged, walked back to his has sock, and sat down, locking his hands between his knees. "I did my best, Ramon," he sakJ. "But so far it looks like a draw. See what you can do " Ruiz-Sanchez took a deep breath. What he was about to do would without any doubt hurt him for the rest of his life, regardless of the goodness of his reasons, or the way time had of turning any knife. The decision had already cost him many hours of concentrated, agonized doubt. But he believed that it had to be done. T disagree with all of you," he said. "I llieve that Lithia should be reported triple-E Unfavorable, as Cleaver does. But I think it should also be given a special classification: X-#." X-I -- but that's a quarantine label," Michelis said. "As a matter of fact -- " "Yes, Mike. I vote to seal Lithia off from ail contact with the human race. Not only now, or for the next century, but forever." vm T he words did not produce the consternation that he had been dreading -- or, perhaps, had been hopii for, somewhere in the back of his mind. Evidently they were all too tired for that. They took his announcement with a kind of stunned emptiness, as though it were so far out of the expected order of events as to be quite meaningless. It was hard to say whether Cleaver or Michelis had been hit the harder. All that could be seen for certain was that Agronski recovered first, and was now ostentatiously cleaning his ears, as if he were ready to Ibten again when Ruiz-Sanchez changed his mind. "Well," Cleaver began. And then again, shaking his head amazedly, like an old man, "Well..." "Tell us why, Ramon," Michelis said, clenching and unclenching his fists. His voice was quite flat, but Ruiz-Sanchez thought he could feel the pain under it. "Of course. But I warn you, Fm going to be very roundabout. What I have to say seems to me to be of the utmost importance, and I don't want to see it rejected out of hand as just the product of my peculiar training and prejudices -- interesting perhaps as a study in aberration, but not germane to the problem. The evidence for my view of Lithia is overwhelming. It overwhelmed me quite against my natural hopes and inclinations. I want you to hear that evidence." "He wants us also to understand," Cleaver said, recovering a little of his natural impatience, "That his reasons are religious and won't hold water if he states them right out."  "Hush," Michelis said. "Listen." "Thank you, Mike. All right, here we go. This planet is what I think is called in English a 'set-up. Let me describe it for you briefly as I see it, or rather as I've come to see it. "Lithia is a paradise. It resembles most closely the Earth in its preAdamic period just before tlic coming of the great glaciers. The resemblance ends just there, because on Lithia the glaciers never cam", and life continued to he spent in the paradi.se. as it was nol allowi.-d to do on Earth. We ftml a coinplctely mixed forC't. with jil.mts which fall from otu(muI if the creative spectrum to ilie other living side by side in perfect amity. To a great extent tliat's also true of the animals, I'he lion doesn't lie down witli the lamb here because Litltia has neitjicr animal, but as an analogy the phrasc' is apt. Parasitism occurs far less often on Lithia t)ian it docs on Earth, and dtere are very few carnivores of any sort. Almost all the surviving land animals eat plants only, and by a neat arrangement whi h is typically Lithian, the plants are admirably set up to attack animals ratlier than each other. "It's an unusual ecology', and fne of the strangest diings about it is its rationality, its extreme, almost single-minded insistence on one-forone relationshis. In one respect it looks almost as though someone had arranged the whole planet to demonstrate die theory of .sets. "In this paradise wi' have a dominant creature, the Lithian. the man of Lithia. This creature is rational. It conforms as ii naturally and without constraint or guidance to the highest ethical code we have evolved on Earth. It needs no laws to enforce this code; somehow, cver)'onc obeys it as a matter of course, although it ha.s never even been written down. There arc no criminals, no deviants, no aberrations of any kind. The people are not standardized -- our own very bad and partial answer to the ethical dilemma -- but instead are highly individual. Yet .somehow no antiMK'ial act of any kind is ever cominiitcd. "Mik-, let mistop liere and ask; What does this suggr'st to you?" "Why, just what I've said before that it suggested," Micliclis said. "An enormously .superior social science, evidently founded in a precise psychological science." "Wry well, I'll go on. I felt as you did at first. Then I came to ask myself: How does it happen that tlie Lithians not only have no deviants -- think of that, vo deviants -- but it just happens, by the uttermost of all coincidences, that tlic code by which they live so perfectly is point for point the code wc strive to obey. Consider, please, the imjxmderables involved in such a coincidence. Even on Earth wc neviT have found a society which evolved independently exactly the satne precepts as the Christian precepts. Oil, there were some duplications, enough to encourage the Twentieth Centui's partiality toward synthetic religions like Thcosophism and Hollywood Vedanta, but no ethical sy.stem on Earth that grew up independently of Cliristianity agreed with it point for point. "And yet here, # light-years from Earth, what do we find? A Chri.stian people, lacking nothing but the specific proper names and the symbolic appurtenances of Christianty. I don't know how you three react to this, but I found it extraordinary and indeed completely impossible -- mathematically impossible -- under any assumption but one. I'D get to that assumption in a moment." "You can't get there too soon for me," Cleaver said morosely. "How a man can stand # light-years from home in deep space and talk such parochial nonsense is beyond my comprehension." "Parochial?" Ruiz-Sanchez said, more angrily than he had intended. "Do you mean that sriiat we think true on Earth is automatically made suspect just by the fact of its removal into deep spare? I beg to remind you, Cleaver, that quantum mechanics seems to hold good on Lithia, and that you see nothing parochial about behaving as if it did. If I believe in Peru that God created the universe, I see nothing parochial about believing it on Lithia. "A while back I thought I had been provided an escape hatch, incidentally. Chtexa told me that the Lithians would like to modify the growth of their population, and he implied that they would welcome some form of birth control. But, as it turned out, birth control in the sense that my Church interdicts it Is impossible to Lithia, and what Chtexa had in mind was obviously some form of conception control, a proposition to which my Church has already given its qualified assent. So there I was, even on this small point forced again to realize that we had found on Lithia the most colossal rebuke to our aspirations that we had ever encountered : A people that seemed to live with ease the kind of life which we associate with saints alone. "Bear in mind that a Muslim who visited Lithia would find no such thing. Neither would a Taoist. Neither would a Zoroastrian, presuming that there were still such, or a classical Greek. But for the four of us -- and J include you, Cleaver, for despite your tricks and your agnosticism you still subscribe to the Christian ethical doctrines enough to be put on the defensive when you flout them -- what we have here on Lithia is a coincidence which beggars description. It is more than an astronomical coincidence -- that tired old phrase for numbers that don't seem very large any more -- it is a iransfinite coincidence. It would take Cantor himself to do justice to the odds against it." "Wait a minute," Agronski said. "Holy smoke. Mike, I don't know any anthropology, I'm lost here. I was with the Father up to the part about the mixed forest, but I don't have any standards to judge the rest. Is it so, what he says?" "Yes, I think it's so," Michelis said slowly. "But there could be differences of opinion as to what It means, if anything. Ramon, go on." describing the planet, and more particularly the Lithians. The Lithians take a lot of explaining; what I've said about them thus far states only the most obvious fact I could go on to point out many more equally obvious facts; that they have no nations and no national rivalries (and if you'll look at the map of Lithia you'll see every reason why they should have developed such rivalries) , that they have emotions and passions but are I Al never moved by them to irrational acts, tliat they have only one langxiage, that they exist in complete harmony with evers thing, large and small, that they find in their world. In shcl, thev-'re a peoijle that couldn't exist, and vet does. "Mike, I'd go beyojKl your view to say diat the Lithian-i are themost perfect examph ol how human beings OXiht to l)thavr ll at very simple reason ih.it they Imhavc now the way Inmuin Ix'ings once did before a series of tilings happened of which we have record. I'd go even farther beyond it, far enough to say that as an example the Litliians arc useless to us, because until the coming of the Kingdom of God no substantial number of human beings will ever be able to imitate Llthian conduct. Human beings seem to have built-in imperfections that the Lithians lack, .so that after thousands of years of trying we are farther away than ever from our origirul emblems of conduct, while the Lithians have never departed from theirs. "And don't allow vourselves to forget for an instant that these eniblciiis of conduct arc the same on both planets. That couldn't ever have happened, either. But it did. "I'm now going to describe another interesting fae:t alioul Lithian civilization. It Ls a fact, whatever you may think of its merits as e;ndencc. It is this: that your Lithian is a creature of logic. Unlike Eartlimen of all stripes, he has no gods, no myths, no legends. He has no lclief in the supernatural, or, as we're calling it in our barbarous jargon these days, the 'paranormal.' He has no traditions. Hr has no tabus. He has no faiths, blind or otherwise. lie is arational as a machine. Inili'rd, the rm!v way in which we can distinguish the Lithian from an organic computer is his possession and use of a moral code. "And that, I beg you to observe, is (oinplclcly irralioii.al. It is based Ilium a set of axioms, of propositions whicli were 'given' from the Ugiiining -- tliough your Lithian will not allow that llierc was ever Clilexa, believes in the .s.inctity ol the individual. Why? Not ly reason, suri'Iy, for there is no way to reason to that )roposilim. It is an axiom. Chtexii believe.s in juridical defen.se. in the equality of all before the code. Why? It's possible to behavi reasonably from the proj)ositlon hut not to reason one's way to it. "If ytm a'sumc that the responsibility to the code varies with age. or with the nature of one's work, or with what family vou happen to belong to, logical behavior can follow from one of those assumptions, but there again one can't arrive at the principle hy reason alone. One begins with belief: 'I think that all people ougiu to be equal before the law.' That is a statement of faitli. nothing more. Yet Lithian civilization is so set up as to suggest that one can arrive at such basic axioms of Christianity, and of Western civilization on Earth as a whole, by reason alone, in tlie plain face of the fact that one cannot." "Those are axioms," Cleaver growled. "You don't arrive at them bv faith, either. You don't arrive at them at all. They re self-eident "Like the axiom that only one parallel can be dravs-n to a given line? Go on, Cleaver, you're a physicist; kick a stone for me and tell me it's self-evident that the thing is solid." "It's puliar," Michelis said in a low voice, "that Liihian culture should be so axiom-ridden without the Lithians being aware of it. I hadn't formulated it in quite this way before, Ramon, but I've been disturbed myself at the bottomless assumptions that He behind Lithian reasoning. Look at what they've done in solid-state physics, for instance. It's a structure of the purest kind of reason, and yet when you get down to its fundamental assumptions you discover the axiom that matter is real. How can thev know that? How did logic lead them to it? If I say that the atom is just a hole-inside-a-holc-througha-hole, where can reason intervene?" "But it works," Cleaver said. "So does our solid-state phyucs -- but we work on opposite axioms," Michelis said. "That's not the issue. I don't myself see how this immense structure of reason which the Lithians have evolved can stand for an instant It doesn't seem to rest on anything." "I'm going to tell you," Rui#Sanchez said. "You won't believe me, but I'm going to tell you anyhow, because I have to. It stands because it's being propped up. That's the simple answer and the whole answer. But first I want to add one more fact about the Lithians. "They have complete physical recapitulation outside the by." "What does that mean?" Agronski said. "Do you know how a human child grows inside its mother's body? It is a one-celled animal to begin with, and then a simple metazoan resembling the freshwater hydra or the simplest jellyfish. Then, very rapidly, it goes through many other animal forms, including the fish, the amphibian, the reptile, the lower mammal, and finally becomes enough like a man to be born. This process biologists call recapitulation. "They assume that the embryo is passing through the various stages of evolution which brought life from the single-celled organism to man, on a contracted time scale. There is a point, for instance, in the development of the fetus when it has gilts. It has a tail almost to the very end of its time in the wcMnb, and sometimes still has it when it is bom. Its circulatory sy.stem at one point is reptilian, and if it fails to pass successfully through that stage, it is born as a bluc baby with patent ductus arteriosus, the tetralogy of Fallot, or a similar heart defect. And so on." "I see," Agronski said. "I've encountered Ae idea before, of course, but I didn't recognize the term." "Well, the Lithians, too, go through this series of metamorphoses as they grow up, but they go through it outside the bodies of their mothers. This whole planet is one huge womb. The Lithian female lays her eggs in her abdominal pouch, and then goes to the sea to give birth to her children. What she bears is not a reptile, but a fish. The fish lives in the sea a while, and tiien develops rudimentary lungs and comes asltore. Stranded bv the tides on the flats, the lungfish develops rudimentary legs and stjuirms in the mud, becoming an amphibian and learning to endure the rigors of li ing away from the sea. Gradually their limlM become stronger, and better set on their bodies, and tlicy become the big froglike things we sometimes see leaping in the mX)nlight, trying to get away from the crocodiles. "Many of them do get away. They carry their habit of leaping with them into the jungle, and there they change once again to liecome the small, kangaroo-like reptiles we've all seen, at one time or another, fliving from us among litc trees, nventually, they emerge, fully grown, from the jungles and take their place.s among the folk of the cities as young Lithians, mady for education. But they have already learned every trick of every environment that their world has to offer except those of their own civilization." gether again and looked up at Ruiz-Saneliez. "But that's a discovery beyond price!" he said with quiet excitement. "Ramon, that alone is worth our trip to Lithia.  can't imagine why it would lead you to ask that the planet be clo.scd! Surely your Church can't object to it in anv wav -- after all, vour then   rists did accept recapitulation in the human embryo, and also the geological record that showed the same process in action over longer spans of time." "Not," Rulz-Sanchez said, "in the way that you think w'e did. The Church accepted the facts, as it alwavs accepts facts. But -- as you )-oursclf suggested not ten minutes ago -- facts have a way of pointing in several different directions at once. The Church is as hostile to the doctrine of evolution -- particularly in respect to man -- as it ever was, and with good reason." "Or with obdurate stupidity," Cleaver said. "All right, Paul, look at it very simply with the original premisc.s of the Bible in mind. If we assume just for the s.ike of argument that God crealeil man, did lie create him ierfect? I should suppose that He did. Is a man perfect without a navel. I don't know, but I'd lx inclined to .say that he isn't. Yet the first man -- Adam, again for the sake of argument -- wasn't bom of woman, and so didn't really need to have a navel. Nevertheless he would have been imperfect without it, and I'll bet that he had one." "What does that prove?" "That the geolcical record, and recapitulation too, do not prove the doctrine of evolution. Given my initial axiom, which is that God created everything from scratch, it's perfectly logical that He should have given Adam a navel, Earth a geological record, and the embryo the process of recapitulation. None of these indicate a real past; all are there lecause the creations involved would have been imperfect otherwise." "Wow'," Cleaver said. "And I used to think that Milne relativity was abstruse." "Oh, any coherent system of thought becomes abstruse if it's examined long enough. I don't see why my belief in a God you can't accept is any more rarefied than Mike's vision of the atom as a holeinside-a-hole-through-a-hole. I expect that in the long run, when we get right down to the fundamental particles of the universe, we'll find that there's nothing there at all -- just no-things moving no-place through no-time. On the day that that happens, I'll have God and you will not -- otherwise there'll be no diflerence between us. "But in the meantime, what we have here on Lithia is very clear indeed. We have -- and now I'm prepared to be blunt -- a planet and a people propped up by the Ultimate Enemy. It is a gigantic trap prepared for all of us. We can do nothing with it but reject it, nothing but say to it. Retro me, Sathanas. If we compromise with it in any way, we are damned.' "Why, Father?" Michelis said quietly. "Look at the premises, Mike. One: Reason is always a sufficient guide. Two: The self-evident is always the real. Three: Good works are an end in themselves. Four: Faith is irrelevant to right action. Five: Right action can exist without love. Six: Peace need not pass understanding. Seven: Ethics can exist without evil alternatives. Eight: Morals can exist without conscience. Nine -- but do I really need to go on? We have heard all these propositions before, and we know Who proposes them. "And we have seen these demonstrations before -- the demonstration, for instance, in the rocks which was supposed to show how the horse evolved from Eohippus, but which somehow never managed to convince the whole of mankind. Then the discovery of intra-uterine recapitulation, which was to have clinched the case for the so-called descent of man -- and yet, somehow, failed again to produce general agreement. These were both very subtle arguments, but the Church is not easily swayed; it is founded on a rock. "Now we have, on Lithia, a new demonstration, both the subtlest and at the same time the crudest of all. It will sway many people who could have been swayed in no other way, and who lack the intelligence or the background to understand that it is a rigged demonstration. It seems to show us evolution in action on an inarguable scale. It is supposed to settle the question once and for all, to rule God out of the picture, to snap the chains that have held Peter's rock together all these many centuries. Henceforth there is to be no more question; there is to be no more God, but only phenomenology -- and, of course, behind the scenes, within the hole that's inside the hole that's through a hole, the Great Nothing itself, the thing that has never learned any word but No: It has many other names, but we know the name that counts. That's left us. "Paul, Mike, Agronski, I have nothing more to say than this: We are ail of us standing on the brink of Hell. By the grace of God, we may still turn back. We must turn back -- for I at least think tliat this is our last chance." IX was that. Tlie Coininissinn was tied, and the question would he tliiown open again in higher cclielons on Earth, which would mean tying Lithia up for vears to come. Tlie planet was now, in effect, on the Index. The ship arrived the next day. The crew was not much surprised to find that the two opposing factions of the Commission were harlly .speaking to eaih other. It often liappened that way. The four Commission members cleaiu'd up the house the Lithians had given tlieni in almost complete silence. Ruiz-Sanchez packed tlie blue book with the gold stamping without being able to look at it except out of the comer of his eye, but even obliquely ho could not help seeing its title : James Joyce He felt as though he himself had been collated, bound and stamped, a tortured human text for futim? generations of Jesuits to explicate and argue. He had rendered the verdict he had found it ncce.ssary for him to render. But he knew tliaf It was not a final verdict, even for himself, and certainly not for the UN, !el alone the Church. In.stead, the verdict itself would be the knotty question for members of his Order yet unborn : Did Father Rniz-Sonchez correctly uiterpret the Divine case, and did his Tulinfi, if so, follow from it? "Let's go, Father. It'll be takeoff time in a few minutes." "All ready, Mike." It was only a short journey to the clearing, where the mighty spindle of the ship stood ready to weave its way back through the geodesics of deep space to tlie .sun that shone on Peru. The baggage went on board smoothly and without fuss. So did tlic specimens, the films, the special reports, the recordings, the sample cases, the vivariums, tlie aquariums, the type-cultures, the pressed plants, the tubes of soil, the chunks of ore, the Lithian manuscripts in their atmosphere of nton; everything was lifted decorously by the cranes and swung inside. Agronski went up the cleats to tlic airlock first, with Michelis following him. Cleaver was stowing some last-minute bit of gear, something that .seemed to require delicate, almost reverent care before the cranes could be allowed to take it in their indifferent grip. RuizSanchez took advantage of the slight delay to look around once moic at the near margins of the forest. At once, he saw Chtexa. The Lilhian was standing at the entrance to the path the Earthmen themselves had taken away from the city to reach the ship. He was carrying something. Cleaver swore under his breath and undid something he had just (Conlinved on page II#) Alexander Pope wrote  Atoms or systems into ruin hurled And now a bubble burst, and now a world' He died in # -- but poets are sometimes the best prophets! The Trouble with By Philip K. Dick lliustroted by Joseph ft. Eberle face car and crossed the pavement on fool, sniffing the chill morning air. Robot work-trucks were starting to rumble past. A gutter slot sucked night debris grtedily. A vanlsliing headline caught liis eye momentarily: He passed on away from the corner, hands in his pockets, looking for Farley's house. Past the usual Worldcraft Store with its conspicuous motto: "Own Your Own World!" Down a short grass-lined walk and onto a sloping tilt-front porch. Up three imitation marble stairs. Then Hull flicked his hand before the code beam and the door melted away. The house was still. Hull found the ascent tube to the second floor and peered up. No sound. Warm air blew around him, tinged with faint smells -- smells of food and people and familiar objects. Had they gone? No. It was only the third day; they'd be around someplace, maybe up on the roof terrace. He ascended to tire second floor and found it also vacant. But distant sounds drifted to his ean. A tinkle of laughter, a man's voice. A woman's -- perhaps Julia's. He hoped so -- hoped she were still conscious. He tried a door at random, steeling himself. S.ometimes during the third and fourth davs the Contest Parties got a little rough. The door melted, but the room was empty. Couches, empty glasses, ashtrays, exhausted stimulant tubes, articles of clothing strewn everywhere -- Abruptly Julia Marlow and Max Farley appeared, arm in arm, followed by sever others, pushing forward in a group, excited and red-cheeked, eyes bright, almost feverish. They entered the room and halted. "Nat!" Julia broke away frtxn Farley and came breathlessly up to him. "Is it that late already?' "Third day," Hull said. "HeUo, Max." "Hello, Hull. Sit down and make yourself comfortable. Can I get you something?" "Nothing. Can't stay. Julia -- " Farley waved a robant over, sweeping two drinks from its chest tray. "Here, Hull. You can stay long enough for one drink." Bart Longstreet and a slender blonde a!ared through a door. "Hull! You here? So socm?" "Third day. I'm picking Julia up. If she still wants to leave." "Don't take her away," the slim blonde protested. She wore a side glance robe, invisible out of the comer of the eye, but an opaque fountain when looked at directly. "They're judging right now. In the lounge. Stick around. The fun's Just beginning." She winked at him with heavy blue-lidded eyes, glazed and sleep-drugged. Hull turned to Julia. "If you want to stay... Julia put her hand nervously on his arm, standing close to him. Not bang her fixed smile she grated m his ear: "Nat, for God's sake, get me out of here. I can't stand it. Please!" Hull caught her intense appeal, her eyes bright vyith desperation. He could feel the mute urgency quivering through her body, tense and strained. "Okay, Julia. We'll take off. Maybe get some breakfast. When did you last eat?" "Two days. I think. I don't know." Her voice trembled. "They're judging right now. God, Nat. You should have seen -- " "Can't go until the judgings over," Farley rumbled. "I think they're almost throu. You didn't enter, Hull? No entry for you?" "No entry." "Surely you're an owner -- " "Nope. Sorry." Hull's voice was faintly ironic. "No world of my own, Max. Can't see it." "You're missing something." Max beamed dopily, rocking back on his heels. "Quite a time -- best Contest Party for weeks. And the real fun begins after the judging. All this is just preliminary." "I know." Hull moved Julia rapidly toward the descent tube. "We'll sec you. So long, Bart. Give me a call when you're out of here." "Hold it!" Bart murmured suddenly, cocking his head. "The judging's over. The winner is going to be announced." He pushed toward the lounge, the othen excitedly behind. "You coming, Hull? Julia?" Hull glanced at the girl. "All right." They followed reluctantly, "For a minute, maybe." The lounge was a seething "I won!" Lora Becker shouted in ecstasy. People pushed and shoved around her, toward the Contest table, grabbing up their entries. Their voices grew in volume, an ominous rumble of discordant sound. Robants calmly moved furniture and fixtures back out of the way, clearing the floor rapidly. An unleashed frenzs' of mounting hysteria was begiiming to fill the big room. "I know it!" Julia's fingers tightened around Hull's arm. "Come on. Let's get out before they start." "Start?" "Listen to them!" Julia's eyes flickered with fear. "Come on, Nat! I've had enough. I can't stand any more of this." "I told you before you came." "You did, didn't you?" Julia smiled briefly, grabbing her coat from a robant. She fastened the coat rapidly around her breasts and shoulders. "I admit it. You told me. Now let's go, for God's sake." She turned, making her way through the surging ma.ss of people toward the descent tube. "Let's get out of here. We'll have breakfa.st. You w'ere right. These things aren't for us." Lora Becker, plump and middleaged, was making her way up onto the stand beside the judges, her entry clasped in her arms. Hull paused a moment, watching the immense woman struggle up. her chemically corrected features gray and sagging in the unwinking overhead lights. The third dav -- a lot of old-timers were beginning to show the effects, even through their artificial masks. Lora reached the stand. "Look!" she shouted, holding up her entry. The Worldcraft bubble glittered, catching the light. In spite of himself Hull had to admire the thing. If the actual world inside was as good as the exterior... Lora turned on the bubble. It The roomful of people became silent, gazing up at the winning entry, the world that had taken the , prize over all other comers. Lora Becker's entry was masterful. Even Hull had to admit it...She increased the magnification, bringing the microscopic central planet into focus. A murmur of admiration swept the room. Again Lora increased the magnification. I'hc central planet grew, showing a pale green ocean lapping faintly at a low shoreline. A city came into view, towers and broad streets, fine ribbons of gold and steel. Above, twin suns beamed down, warming the city. Myriads of inhabitants swarmed about their activities. "Wonderful," Bart Longstrect said softly, coming over beside Hull. "But the old hag has been at it sixty )'ears. No wonder she won. She's entered every Contest I can remember," "It's nice," Julia admitted in a clipped voice. "You don't care for it?" Longstreet asked. "I don't care for any of this!" "She wants to go," Hull explained, moving toward the descent tube. "We'll see you later, Bart." Bart Longstreet nodded. "I know what you mean. In many ways I agree. You mind if I -- " "Watch!" Lora Becker shouted, her face flushed. She increased the magnification to maximum focus, showing details of the minute city. "See them? See?' The inhabitants of the city came into sharp view. They hurried about their business, endless thousands of them. In cars and on foot. Across spidery spans between buildings, breathtakingly beautiful. Lora held the Worldcraft bubble up high, breathing rapidly. She gazed around the room, her eyes bright and inflamed, glittering unhealthily. The murmurings rose, sweeping up in excitement. Numerous Worldcraft bubbles came up, chest-high, gripped in eager, impassioned hands. Lora's mouth opened. Saliva dribbled down the creases of her sagging face. Her lips twitched. She raised her bubble up over her head, her doughy chest swelling convulsively. Suddenly her face jerked, features twisting wildly. Her thick body swayed grotesquely -- and from her hands the Worldcraft bubble flew, crashing to the stand in front of her. The bubble smashed, bursting into a thousand pieces. Metal and glass, plastic parts, gears, struts, tubes, the vital machinery of the bubble, splattered in all directions. Pandemonium broke loose. All around the room other owners were smashing their worlds, breaking them and crushing them, stamping on them, grinding the delicate control mechanisms underfoot. Men and women in a frenzy of abandon, released by Lora Becker's signal, quivering in an orgy of Dionysian lust. Crushing and breaking their carefully constructed worlds, one after another. "God," Julia gasped, struggling to get away, Longstreet and Hull beside her. Faces gleamed with sweat, eyes feverish and bright. Mouths gaped foolishly, muttering meaningless sounds. Clothes were tom, ripped off. A girl went down, sliding underfoot, her shrieks lost in the general din. Another followed, dragged and women struggled in a blur of abandon, cries and gasps. And on all sides the hideous sounds of smashing metal and glass, the unending noise of worlds being destroyed one after another. Julia dragged Hull from the lounge, her face white. She shuddered, closing her eyes. "I knew it was coming. Three days, building up to Ais. Smashed -- they're smashing them all. All the worlds.' Bart Longstreet made his way out after Hull and Julia. "Lunatics." He lit a cigarette shakily. "What the hell gets into them? This has happened before. They start breaking, smashing their worlds up. It doesn't make sense." Hull reached the descent tube, "tome along with us, Bart. We'll have breakfast -- and I'll give you my theory, for what it's worth." "Just a second." Bart Longstreet scooped up his Worldcraft bubble from the arms of a robant. "My Contest entry. Don't want to lose it." He hurried after Julia and Hull. i.Tm looking around. "None for me," Julia murmured. She settled back in her chair, sighing. "I'm perfectly happy" "I'll take some." Bart pushed his cup toward tlie coffee dispenser. It filled the cup and returned it. "You've got a nice little place here, Hull." "Haven't you seen it before?" "I don't get up this way. I h,ven't been in Canada in years." "Let's hear your theory," Julia niunnured. "Go jJiead," Bart said. "We're waiting." Hull was silent for a moment. He gazed moodily across the table, past the dishes, at the thing sitting on the window ledge. Bart's Contest entry, his Worlclcraft bubble. "'Own Your Own World'," Hull quoted ironically. "Quite a slogan." "Packman thought it up himself," Bart said. "When he was young. Almost a century ago." "That long?" "Packman takes treatments. A man in hLs position can afford them." "Of course." Hull got slowly to his feet. He crossed the room and returned with the bubble. "Mind?" he asked Bart. "Go ahead." Hull adjusted the controls mounted on the bubble's surface. The interior scene flickered into focus. A miniature planet, revolving slowly. A liny blue-white sun. He increased the magnification, bringing the planet up in size. "Not bad," Hull admitted presently. "Primitive. Late Jurassic. I don't have the knack. I can't seem to get them into the mammal stage. TTiis is my sixteenth tr)'. I never can get any farther than this." The scene was a dense jungle, steaming with fetid rot. Great shapes stirred fitfully among the decaying ferns and marshes. Coiled, gleaming, reptilian bodies, smoking shapes ruing up from the thick mud -- "Turn it off," Julia murmured. "I've seen enough of them. We viewed hundreds for the Contest." "I didn't have a chance." Bart retrieved his bubble, snapping it off. "You have to do better than the Jurassic, to win. Competition is keen. Half the people there had their bubbles into the Eocene -- and at least ten into the Pliocene. Lora's entry wasn't much ahead. I counted several city-building civilizations. But hers was almost as advanced as we are." "Sixty years," Julia said. "She's been trying a long time. She's worked hard. One of those to whom it's not a game but a real passion. A way of life." "And then site smashes it," Hull said thoughtfully. "Smashes the bubble to bits. A world she's been w'orking on for years. Guiding it through period after period. Higher and higher. Smashes it into a million pieces." "Why?" Julia asked. "Why, Nat? ly do they do it? They get so far. building it up -- and then they tear it all down again." Hull leaned back in his chair. "It began," he stated, "when we failed to find life on any of the other planets.' When our exploring parties came back empty-handed. Eight dead orbs -- lifeless. Good for nothing. Not even lichen. Rock and sand. Endless deserts. One after the other, all the way out to Pluto." "It was a hard realization," Bart said. "Of course, that was before our time." "Not much before. Packman remembers it. A century ago. We waited a long time for rocket travel, flight to other planets. And then to find nothing..." "Like Columbus finding the world really was flat," Julia said. "With an edge and a void." "Worse. Columbus was looking for a short route to China. They could have continued the long way. But when we explored the system and found nothing we were in for trouble. People had counted on new worlds, new lands in the sky. Colonization. Contact with a variety of races. Trade. Minerals and cultural products to exchange. But most of all the thrill of landing on planets with amazing life-forms." "And instead of that... "Nothing but dead rock and wa.ste. Nothing that could .support life -- our own or any other kind. A vast disappointment set in on all levels of society." "And then Packman brought out the Worldcraft bubble," Bart murmured. " 'Own Your Own World'. There was no place to go, outside of Terra. No other worlds to visit. You couldn't leave here and go to anotlier world. So instead, you -- " "Instead you stayed home and put together your own world." Hull smiled wryly. "You know, he has a child's version out, now. A sort of preparation kit. So the child can cover the basic problems of world building before he even has a bubble." "But look. Nat," Bart said. "The bubbles seemed like a good idea, at first. We couldn't leave Terra so we built our own worlds right here. Sub-atomic worlds, in controlled containers. We start life going on a sub-atomic world, feed it problems to make it evolve, try to raise it higher and higher. In theory there's nothing wrong with the idea. It's certainly a creative pastime. Not a merely passive viewing like television. In fact, world-building is the ultimate art form. It takes the place of ail entertainments, all the passive sports as well as music and painting -- " "But something went wrong." "Not at first," Bart objected. "At first it was creative. Everybody bought a Worldcraft bubble and built his own world. Evolved life farther and farther. Molded life. Controlled it. Competed with others to see who could achieve the most advanced world." "And it solved another problem," Julia added. "The problem of leisure. With robots to work for us and robants to serve us and take care of our needs -- " "Yes, that was a problem," Hull admitted. "Too much leisure. Notliing to do. That, and the disappointment of finding our planet the only habitable planet in the system. "Packman's bubbles seemed to solve both problems. But something went wrong. A change came. I noticed it right away." Hull stubbed out his cigarette and lit another. "The change began ten years ago -- and it's been growing worse." manded. "Explain to me why everyone stopped building their worlds creatively and began to destroy." "Ever seen a child pull wings off a fly?" "Certainly. But -- " "The same tiling. Sadism? No, not exactly. More a sort of curiosity. Power. Why does a child break things? Power, again. We must never forget something. These world bubbles are substitutes. They take the place of sometliing else, of finding genuine life on our own planets. And they're just too damn small to do that. "These worlds are like toy boats in a bath tub. Or model rocketships you see kids playing with. They're surrogates, not the actual thing. These people who operate them -- why do they want them? Because they can't explore real planets, big planets. They have a lot of energy dammed up inside them. Energy they can't express. "And bottlcd-up energy sours. It becomes aggressive. People work with tlieir little worlds for a time, building them up. But finally they reach a point where their latent hostility, their sense of being deprived, their -- " "It can be explained more easily," Bart said calmly. "Your theory is too elaborate." "Plow do you explain it?" "Man's innate destructive tendencies. Plis natural desire to kill and spread ruin." "There's no such thing," PIull said flatly. "Man isn't an ant. He has no fixed direction to his drives. He has no instinctive 'desire to destroy any more than he has an instinctive desire to carve ivory letteropeners. He has energy -- and the outlet it takes depends on the opportunities available. "That's what's wrong. All of us have energy, the desire to move, act, do. But we're bottled up here, sealed off, on one planet. So we buv Worldcraft bubbles and make little worlds of our own. But microscopic worlds aren't enough.' They're as satisfactory as a toy sailboat is to a man who wants to go sailing." Bart considered a long lime, deep in thought. "You may be right," he admitted finally. "It sounds reasonable. But what's your suggestion? If the other eight planets arc dead -- " "Keep exploring. Beyond the system." "We're doing that." "Try to find outlets that aren't so artificial." Bart grinned. "You feel this way because you never caught the hang of it." He thumped his bubble fcKidly. "I don't find it artificial." "But most people do," Julia put in. "Most people aren't satisfied. That's why w'e left the Contest Party." Bart giuntcd. "It's turning sour, all right. Quite a scene, wasn't it?" He reflected, frowning. "But the bubbles are better than nothing. What do you sugge.st? Give up our bubbles? What sliould we do instead? Just sit around and talk?" "Nat loves to talk," Julia murmured. "Like all intellectuals." Bart tapped Hull's sleeve. "When you sit in your seat in the Directorate you're with the Intellectual and Professional class -- gray stripe." "And you?" "Blue stripe. Industrial. You know that." Hull nodded. "That's right You're with Terran Spaceways. The ever-hopeful company." "So you want us to give up our bubbles and just sit around. Quite a solution to the problem." "You're going to have to give them up." Hull's face flushed. "What you do after that is your afTair." "What do you mean?" Hull turned toward Longstreet, eyes blazing. "I've introduced a bill in the Directorate. A bill that will outlaw Worldcraft." Bart's mouth fell open. "You what?" "On what grounds?" Julia asked, waking up. "On moral grounds," Hull stated calmly. "And I think I can get it through." buzzed with murmuring echoes, its vast reaches alive with moving shadows, men taking their places and preparing for the session's business. Eldon von Stern, Directorate Floor Leader, stood with Hull off to one side behind the platform. "Let's get this straight," von Stem said nervously, running his fingers through his iron-gray hair. "You intend to speak for this bill of yours? You want to defend it yourself?" Hull nodded. "That's right. Why not?" "The analytical machines can break the bill down and present an impartial report for the members. Spellbinding has geme out of style. If you present an emotional harangue you can be certain of losing. The members won't -- " "m take the chance. It's too important to leave to the machines." Hull gazed out over the immense room that was slowly quieting. Representatives from all over the world were in their places. Whiteclad property owners. Blue-clad flnandal and industrial magnates. The red shirts of leaders from factory cooperatives and communal farms. The green-clad men and women representing the middleclass consumer group. His own gray-striped body, at the extreme right, the doctors, lawyers, scientists, educators, intellectuals and professionals of all kinds. "I'll take the chance," Hull repeated. "I want to see the bill passed. It's time the issues were made clear." Von Stem shrugged. "Suit yourself." He eyed Hull curiously. "What do you have against Worldcraft? It's too powerful a combine to buck. Packman himself is here, someplace. I'm surprised you -- " The robot chair flashed a signal. Von Stem moved away from Hull, up onto the platform. "Are you sure you want to speak for the bill?" Julia said, standing beside Hull in the shadows. "Maybe he's right. Let the machines analyze the bill." Hull was gazing out across the sea of faces, trying to locate Packman. The owner of Worldcraft was sitting out there. Forrest Packman, in his immaculate white shirt, like an ancient, withered angel. Packman preferred to sit with the property group, considering Worldcraft real estate instead of industry. Property still had the edge on prestige. Von Stem touched Hull's arm. "All right. Take the chair and explain your proposal." Hull stepped out onto the platform and seated himself in the big iflarble chair. The endless rows of faces before him were carefully devoid of expression. "You've read the terms of the proposal I'm speaking for," Hull began, his voice magnified by the speakers on each member's desk. "I propose we should declare Worldcraft Industries a public menace and the real property the possession of the State. I can state my grounds in a few sentences. "The theory and construction of. the Worldcraft product, the subatomic universe system, is knowm to you. An infinite number of subatomic worlds exist, microscupic counterparts of our own spatial coordinate. Worldcraft developed, almost a century ago, a method of controlling to thirty decimals tlie forces and stresses involved on these micro-coordinate planes, and a fairly simplified machine which could be manipulated by any adult person. "These machines for controlling specific areas of sub-atomic coordinates have been manufactured and sold to the general public with the slogan: 'Own Your Own World'. The idea is that the owner of the machine becomes literally a world owner, since the machine controls forces that govern a sub-atomic univ'erse that is directly analogous to our own. "By purchasing one of these Worldcraft machines, or bubbles, the person finds himself in possession of a virtual universe, to do with as he sees fit. Instruction manuals supplied by the Companyshow him how to control these minute worlds so that life forms appear and rapidly evolve, giving rise to higher and higher forms until at last -- assuming the owner is sufficiently skilful -- he has in his personal possession a civilization of beings on a cultural par with our own. "During the last few years we have seen the sale of these machines grow until now almost everyone possesses one or more sub-atomic worlds, complete with civilizations. And these years have also seen many of us take our private universes and grind the inhabitants and planets into dust. "There is no law which prevents us from building up elaborate civilizations, evolved at an incredible rate of speed, and then crushing them out of existence. That b why my proposal has been presented. These minute civilizations are not dreams. They are real. They actually exist. TTie microscopic inhabitants are -- " A restless stir moved through the vast hall. There were murmurs and coughs. Some members had switched off their speakers. Hull hesitated. A chill touched him. The faces below were blcuik, cold, uninterested. He continued rapidly. "The inhabitants are, at present, subject to the slightest whim their owner may feel. If we wish to reach down and crush their world, turn on tidal waves, earthquakes, tornados, fire, volcanic action -- if we wish to destroy them utterly, diere is nothing they can do. "Our position in relation to these minute civilwations is godlike. We can, with a wave of the hand, obsend the lightning down, level their cities, squash their tiny buildings like ant hills. We can toss them about like toys, playthings, victlm.s of our every whim." Hull stopped, rigid with apprehension. Some of the members had risen and strolled out. Von Stem's face ttisted with ironic amusement. Hull continued lamely. "I want to see Worldcrafi bubbles outlawed. We owe it to these civilizations on humanitarian grounds, on moral groimds -- " He went on, fimsliing as best he could. When he got to his feet there was a faint ripple of applame from the gray-striped professional group. But the white-clad property owners were utterly silent. And the blue industrialists. The red sltiris and the green-clad consumer representatives were silent, impassive, even a little amused. Hull returned to the wings, cold with the stark realization of defeat. "We've lost," he muttered, dazed. "I don't understand." Julia took hi-s arm. "Maybe an appeal on some other grounds... Maybe the machines can still -- " Bart Longstreet came out of the shadows. "No good, Nat. Won't work." Hull nodded. "I know." "You can't moralize Worldcraft away. That's not the solution." Von Stem had given the signal. The members began to cast their votes, the tabulation machines whirring to life. Hull stood staring silently out at the murmuring room, crushed and bewildered. Suddenly a shape appeared in front of him, cutting ofT his view. Impatiently he moved to one side -- but a rasping voice stopped him. "Too bad, Mr. Hull. Better luck next time." Hull stifTened. "Packman!" he muttered. "What do you want?" Forrest Packman came out of the shadows, moving toward him slowly, feeling his way blindly along. B art longstreet stared at the old man with unconcealed hostility. 'T'll see you Liter, Nat." He turned abruptly and Started off. Julia stopped him. "Bart, do you have to -- " "Important business. I'll be back later." He moved off down tlie aisle, toward the industrial section of Uie hall. Hull faced Packman. lie had never seen the old man so close before. He studied him as he advanced slowly, feeling his way along on the arm of his robant. Forrest Packman was old -- a hundred and seven years. Presewed by hormones and blood transfusions, elaborate washing and rejuvenating processes tliat maintained life in his ancient, withered body. His eyes, deep-sunk, peered up at Hull as he catne near, slirunken hands clutching the arm of his robant, breatli coming hoarse and dry. "Hull? You don't mind if I chat with you as the voting goes on? I W'on't be long." He peered blindly past Hull. "Who left? I couldn't see -- ' "Bart Longstreet. Spaceways." "Ohj yes. I know him. Your speech was quite interesting, Hull. It reminded me of the old days. Tlese people don't remember how it was. Times have changed." He stopped, letting the robant wipe his mouth and chin. "I used to be interested in rhetoric. Some of the old masters..." The old man rambled on. Hull studied him curiously. Was this frail withered old man really the power behind Worldcraft? It didn't seem possible. "Bryan," Packman whispered, nings Bryan. I never heard hiin, of course. But they say he was the greatest. Your speech wasn't bad. But you don't understand. I listened carefully. You have some good ideas. But what you're tr'ing to do is absurd. You don't know enough about people. Nobody's' really interested in -- " He broke off, coughing feebly, his robant gripping him with metal supports. Hull pushed impatiently past. "The voting is almost finished. I want to hear. If you have anything to say to me you can file a regular memo plate." Packman's robant stepped out, barring his way. Packman went on slowly, shakily. "Nobody is really interested in such appeals, Hull. You made a good speech but you don't have the idea. Not yet, at least. But you talk well, better than Fve heard for a long time. These young fellow, faces all washed, running around like office boys -- " Hull strained, listening to the vote. The impassive robant body cut off his view, but over Packman's dry rasp he could hear the results. Von Stern had risen and was reading the totals, group by group. "Four hundred against, thirtyfive in favor," von Stem stated.' "The proposal has been defeated." He tossed the tabulation cards down and picked up his agenda. "We'l! continue with the next business." Behind Hull, Packman broke off suddenly, his skull-like head cocked on one side. His deep-sunk eyes glittered and the trace of a smile twitched across his lips. "Defeated? Not even all the grays voted for you, Hull. Now maybe you'll listen to what I have to say." Hull turned away from the hall. The robant lowered its arm. "It's over," Hull said. "Come on." Julia moved uneasily away from Packman. "Let's get out of here." "You see," Packman continued relentlessly, "you have potentials that could be developed into something. When I was your age I had tlie sajne idea you have. I thought if people could see the moral issues involved, they w'ould respond. But people aren't like that. You have to be realistic, if you want to get somewhere. People... Hull scarcely heard the dry, raspy voice whispering away. Defeat. Worldcraft, the world bubbles, would continue. The Contest Parties: bored, restless men and women with too much time, drinking and dancing, comparing worlds, building up to the climax -- then the orgy of breaking and smashing. Over and over. Endlessly. "Nobody can buck Worldcraft," Julia said. "It's too big. We'll have to accept the bubbles as a part of our lives. As Bart says, unless we have .something else to offer in their place... Bart Longstreet came rapidly out of the shadows. "You still here?" he said to Packman. "I lost," Hull said. "The vote -- " "I know. I heard it. But it doesn't matter." Longstreet pushed past Packman and his robant. "Stay here. I'll join you in a second. I have to see von Stem." Something in Longstreet's voice made Hull look up sharply. "What is it? What's happened?" "Why doesn't it matter?" Julia demanded. Longstreet stepped up on the platform and made his way to von Stern. He handed him a message plate and then retired to the shadows. Von Stem glanced at the plate -- And stopped talking. He got to his feet slowly, the plate gripped tightly. "I have an announcement to make." Von Stern's voice was shaking, almost inaudible. "A dispatch from Spaceways' check station on Proxima Centauri." An excited murmur rushed through the hall. "Exploring ships in the Proxima system have contacted trading scouts from an extra-galactic civilization. An exchange of messages has already occurred. Spaceways ships are moving toward the Arcturan system with the expectation of finding -- " Shouts, a bedlam of sound. Men and women on their feet, screaming in wild joy. Von Stern stopped reading and stood, his arms folded, his gray face calm, waiting for them to quiet. Forrest Packman stood immoving, his withered hands pressed together, his eyes shut. His robant sent support braces around him, catching him in a shield of protecting metal. "Well?" Longstreet shouted, pushing back to them. He glanced Hi the frail, withered figure held up by the robant's supports, then at Hull and Julia. "What do you say, Hull? Let's get out of here -- so we can celebrate." 'LL fly you home," Hull said M to Julia. He looked around for an inter-continental cruiser. "Too bad you live so far away. Hong Kong is so damn out of the way." Julia caught his arm. "You can drive me yourself. Remember? The Pacific Tube is open. We're connected with Asia, now." "That's right." Hull opened the door of his surface car and Julia slid in. Hull got behind the wheel and slammed the door. "I forgot, with all these other things on my mind. Maybe we can see each other more often. I wouldn't mind spending a few days vacation in Hong Kong. Maybe you'll invite me." He sent the car out into traffic, moving with the remote-controlled beam. "Tell me more," Julia asked. "I want to know all Bart said." "Not much more. They've known for some time that something was up. That's why he wasn't too worried about Worldcraft. He knew the bottom would fall out as soon as the announcement was made." "Why didn't he tell you?" Hull grinned wryly. "How could he? Suppose the first reports were wrong? He wanted to wait until tley were sure. He knew what the results would be" Hull gestured. "Look." On both sides of the strip a tide of men and women poured out of buildings, up from the underground factories, a seething mass confusion, shouting and cheering, throwing things in the air, tossing paper out of windows, carrying each other on their shoulders. "They're working it off," Hull said. "The way it should be. Bart says Arcturus is supposed to have seven or eight fertile planets, some of them inhabited, some just forests and oceans. The extra-galactic traders say that most systems have at least one usable planet. They visited our system a long time ago. Our early ancestors may have traded with them." "Then there's plenty of life in the galaxy?" Hull laughed. "If what they say is true. And the fact that they exist is proof enough." "No more Worldcraft." "No." Hull shook his head. No more Worldcraft. Stock was already being dumped. Worthless. Probably the State w'ould absorb the bubbles already in existence and seal them off, leaving the inhabitants free to determine their own futures. The neurotic smashing of laboriously achieved cultures was a thing of the past. The buildings of living creatures would no longer be pushed over to amuse some god suffering from ennui and frustration. Julia sighed, leaning against Hull. "Now we can take it easy. Sure, you're invited to stay. We can take out permanent cohabitation papers if you want to -- " Hull leaned forward suddenly, his body rigid. "Where's the Tube?" he demanded. "The strip should be hitting it any minute." Julia peered ahead, frowning. "Something's wrong, Slow down." Hull slowed the car. An obstruction signal was flashing ahead. Gars were stopping on all sides, shifting into emergency retard lanes. He ground the car to a halt. Rocket cruisers were sweeping overhead, exhaust tubes shattering the evening silence. A dozen uniformed men ran across a field, directing a rumbling robot derrick. "What the hell -- " Hull muttered. A soldier stepped up to the car, swinging a communication flare. "Turn around. We need the whole strip." "But -- " "What happened?" Julia asked. "The Tube. Earthquake, someplace half way out. Broke the Tube in ten sections." The soldier hur ried off. Construction robots rushed past in a hand cart, assembling equipment as they went. Julia and' Hull stared at each other wide-eyed. "Good Lord," Hull muttered. "Ten places. And the Tube must have been full of cars." (Continued on page #) The climate was perfect, the sky was always blue, and -- best of all -- nobody had to work. What more could anyone want? Planet of Dreams By James McKimmcy, Jr. Ulustroted by Poul Orbon spinning globe, placed in the universe to weather and age by itself until the end of things. But because its air was good and its earth was fertile, Daniel Loveral had placed a finger upon a map and said, "This is tlie planet. This is the Dream Planet." That was two years before, back on Earth. And now Loveral with his selected flock had shot through space, to light like chuckling geese upon the planet, to feel the effect of their dreams come true. Loveral was sitting in his office, drumming his long fingers against his desk while the name, Atkinson, ticked through his brain like the sound of a sewing machine. Would he be the only one, Loveral asked himself, or was he just the first? In either case, it was up to Loveral, as leader and guiding hand, to stop this thing and stop it quickly. Loverd stood up and put on his jacket, although there was no need for it, other an the formality it gave his figure. He stepped out oi his office into a clear bright day, where the air was clean and fresh in his lungs, at once like frost and fire and sweet perfume. He walked along a winding path, which was bordered by slim-necked flowers and a short hedge whose even clipped lines were kept neat by tireless robot hands. Trees pointed to a blue sky, rocking and fluttering their leaves in a soft breeze, and glinting metallic houses lay peacefully beyond in wooded hollows and upon slight hills. A whole small world was before his eyes, set there upon his direction, maintained by himself with the help of a dozen complex machines which lay locked and sealed in the Maintenance Room for only his fingers to touch. It was a busy life for Loveral, up at dawn to work until deep night, keeping his flock happy and free a perfect plan, one which had been tested and turned in his mind for years. If he had to work hard to keep it running smoothly, that was all right. In fact, he had never been happier. Now, however, there was this business about Atkinson. Loveral was disturbed about that. He walked on, over the quiet path which would lead to the house where Atkmson and his wife lived. Loveral smiled, in readiness for any happy face that might appear before him, to greet him, to show with thanWul eyes appreciation for his wonderful world. But that, too, brought thoughts that were a bit disturbing. Lately there had been few such faces. Most of his flock no longer seemed to care about walking along the cultivated paths, or smiling, or nodding, or touching a leaf here or a flower there. They preferred, it appeared, to remain deep inside their houses, as though they might have become tired of the soft perfection of Dream Planet. As though they might have become weary of quiet woods and sweet bird-music or a sky which was always blue. Loveral shook his head as he walked, puzzling out his thoughts. It was strange, but nothing to worry about certainly. Just this business about Atkinson. That was his only worry. He came slowly up a hill, the top of which held a low curving house, with a silver roof and wide, sweeping windows. There were yellow and blue and deep red flowers, skirting the sides of the house, and green ivy grew thickly between the glistening windows. The lawn, dotted with small leafy trees and round bushes, sloped down from the front of the house, looking like a carefully arranged painting. Loveral pressed a button beside a shining door and waited, smiling tlirough his pale blue kindly eyes. after several moments and stood blinking at him. She was a thin woman, who seemed to have gotten even thinner, Loveral noticed. She was working her fingers at the neck of her dress. She smiled but her lips wavered. "My dear," Loveral greeted her in his soft voice, showing the goodness in his eyes. She nodded her recognition, opening her mouth wiUiout speaking. "May I?" said Loveral finally, waving his long fingers toward the living room. "Oh, yes," said the woman. "Of course, Mr. Loveral." And as she spoke Loveral had the impression she might suddenly begin crying. Loveral followed the woman into the house, noticing all over again the precise way everything had been arranged. The rug was soft beneath his feet, and the light came in through the windows in such a way that it, too, became soft. The furniture, molded to hold a human body most comfortably, rested about the room in perfect efficiency. "'our place is so lovely," Loveral said, out of his old habit from Earth. But his words seemed to ring strangely in the quiet, because it was his own arrangement, like all the other rooms on the planet. And Mrs. Atkinson, standing thin and nervous before him, had nothing, after all, to do with it. The cleanliness was the vork of his robot machines, the planning his own. It was like complimenting himself. He cleared his throat and stood, smiling his most benevolent smile to reassure Mrs. Atkinson. "Ah, my dear. Is George about?" Again, the woman's hand skittered to her throat. "He's not ill, surely?" Loveral asked, although this, too, was silly, because foods, selected and pre pared for utmost nutrition, packed and frozen to be doled out in weekly quantities, purified air, diseaseers on exercise, and of course Loveral's own philosophies of quiet, peaceful living -- all of this guarded well the health of Dream Planet's flock. The woman shook her head. "No, George is fine. He's just -- sleeping, I think." "Rest is nature's finest tonic," said Loveral, and hearing his voice thought suddenly there was hardly anything he could say any more that might not sound a bit out of place in this peaceful world. Rest to the man who had nothing to do ceased to be a tonic. "Yes, yes," said Loveral. "May we just sit down, my dear?" Mrs. Atkinson jerked a hand tc ward one of the chairs and then wound her fingers. Loveral sat down and leaned back, smiling his most charming smile. "Perhaps George might awaken after a bit?" "Oh, yes," the woman said, her eyes flickering, and she sat upon the edge of one chair, like a bird perched upxn a thin wire. Loveral waited, legs crossed, leaning his head back against the silken softness of the chair. It was so good to relax these days. The business of w'atching and of caring for his flock was trying. When you have brought an entire community of people at great expense through space, guaranteeing to give them a life of constant comfort and ease, so that they might dream and think as they wander through the flowers and the leaves, their thoughts cleansed of worry about work and responsibility, then you have a job. Loveral was most busy, busier than his heritage of wealth ever before had allow, seeing to all of this. But he also was most cemtent -- with everything except Atkinson. Mrs. Atkinson teetered on the edge of her chair, as though she might at any moment go flying across the room in a crazy gyration. There was something about her eyes, Loveral noticed, while he peacefully nodded in the chair. Fear, perhaps. If so, he probably had been right. He tightened himself, listening. There it was again. The sound. Just as he had heard it a day before w'hen he had passed near the house. He leaned forward quickly. Mrs. Atkinson jumped. Loveral smiled. "Didn't I hear a noise of some sort, my dear?" "Noise?" the wwnan said, as though her own voice were the sound of an echo. "An odd noise," Loveral said, his eyes searching. The woman's hands fluttered about her dress. Loveral stood up. "Would you mind if I just glanced about, my dear?" The woman didn't answer, but Loveral was already moving across the room toward a door. He opened it and walked down a hall. The noise grew stronger. He threw open another door. H e stood Watching while George Atkinson spun around, dark eyes flashing, hair tousled. There was a two days' growth of beard darkening Atkinson's face. "Why, George," Loveral said, swiftly examining tlie litter of metal and wood which was spread over a table behind Atkinson. There was a home-made hammer in Atkinson's hand. "What have we here, George?" "Something for you," Atkison said, tightening his fingers about the handle of me hammer. Loveral grinned his famous Loveral grin. "That's fine. What could it be?" "None of your damned business." 'George' Loveral said, his smile still white but his eyes narrow and quick. The woman was behind them. Her voice screeched. "George, I told you. Why didn't you listen, George? You should have listened ta me. You -- " Loveral held up a hand, still watching Atkinson. "Now tell me, George, what is it you're making for me?" Atkinson raised the hammer slightly. Loveral stood very' still. "That's a nice hammer, George." Atkinson's eyes were black beneath his thick brows. "You made that, didn't you?" Loveral asked. "Yes, I made that," Atkinson said. "I made that and I made something else. Another minute and ril have that finished, too." "George," said Loveral, stepping quietly forward, "I don't like to say this, of course. You've been one of our very best menibcrs. But nobody works here, George. We can't allow that. You know the rules." "I know the rules, all right." "Well, then," Loveral said, extending his hand toward the hammer, "we'll just destroy this and whatever else you might have been making. W'e'll just forget it ever happened. We'll get along real fine that way, George. We'll just be such good friends." "We'll just go to hell," said Atkinson, snatching his hammer away. Loveral's smile disappeared. "I'll tell you, George. I have to mean business with this. You know the reasons. If w'e allow anybody to work here, then there's going to be trouble. That isn't our plan. We're here to grow within ourselves and expand culturally. Not to commerciali#e a beautiful world like Dream Planet." Atkinson stood unmoving, and Loveral could see the way the man's muscles were tight, like steel springs, and the way his eyes burned deep inside their blackness. "VVeVe given you everything you need," Loveral explained, trying to adjust the smile on his lips again. "Everybody has everything they want. But, you see, if you sit there and work and make something that someone else doesn't have, then the whole system is destroyed. Then someone will want what you've made. We'll have jealousy and hatred and fighting. This is the stuff of which wars are made, George. You know that. It starts with small things like this, but it grows. When it does, the structure of our life here will collapse. You wouldn't want that, would you, George?" "YesI" Atkinson said, his mouth white at the edges. "I'd like to see the whole rotten thing collapsed and blown to hell!" Loveral's teeth snapped together and his lips grew tight. He could feel a muscle jumping along his neck. Atkinson looked at him with furious eyes. "What do you think it's like, living this way? You're busy working twenty-four hours a day, while we wander around this damned prison like the breathing dead. You can feel sweat and aches in your bones from a hard day's work. Sleep is like medicine to you, instead of another stretch of torture. You can forget your own brain for a while by doing something with your hands. You can relax because you can get tired. Not us, by God. Not us!" "I envy you, George," Loveral said through his teeth. "Oh, like hell you do. You treat us like we were helpless infants. You feed and clothe us and do all our work, and you're so happy you damned near split your guts." "I'll take that, if you don't mind," Loveral said, reaching for the hammer, his voice suddenly icy cold. Atkinson slammed back against the table. "No you won't. You won'f take anything more at all. You've taken our spirit and our pride and the strength right out of our spines. You won't take anything more!" "George?" Loveral said, but not moving any further. Atkinson slid the hammer back of him onto the table, and his hands were .searching among a dozen scattered pieces of metal and wood. He watched Loveral as he worked. "Let me show you what else I've made," he said. "I'd hate to do it," Loveral said, "but I can stop your food, your water, everything." Atkinson's hands moved swiftly, assembling the pieces. He nodded. "You can, but you won't." "I have the only keys to the storage units. I control everything, George." "Correction," said Atkinson, holding an assembled revolver in his hands. "You did," kinson had in his hands. He blinked. "You're nearly dead," Atkinson said. Loveral looked at Atkinson, into his eyes. "If you wanted to kill me, you could have done it some other way." Atkinson shook his head. "Just this way. Just with something that took me dozens of days and nights to make. With something that made me sweat and swear to get. It was difficult -- with no tools or proper materials -- but that made it all the better. Now' I've got it finished," he said, pushing a bullet into the chamber, "and ready to use." Loveral stood frozen, then he turned. "My dear," he said to the woman who moved her mouth as though her voire had been pumped out of her. He reached to touch her shoulder. She recoiled, as though his fingers held poison. "George," he .wid, turning hack to the black-eyed man. "This is a great moment," Atkinson said, lifting the muzzle of the revolver. "When I squeeze the trigger, it'll be like blowing the lock off a prison door. I'll go yelling to the others, and we'll smasli down the whole goddamned place. We'll smash it down, so we'll have to rebuild it. We'll pull apart every robot you've got. We'll tear apart the fo lockers and have a celebration for a wreck, and when we've gotten sick from too much food, we'll start growing some more with our own hands. We'll make forges for the men and looms for the women. We'U bum our clothes and make new ones. We'll grow com in the fields. We'll pump water from the ground. You're finished, Loveral." Loveral stared at the revolver. "George," he said, pleading. "The plans. The beautiful, beautiful plans. All of you, you all wanted peace and contentment. Time to think and dream. You all wanted to get away from the work and the worry and the responsibility. You -- " Atkinson fired the gun into Loveral's stomach. Loveral gestured at the air and fell to liis knees. Atkinson threw his gun through a window and grabbed his wife by the hand. "Hurrs'I" he said, laughing. "Hurry!" Loveral felt of the blood on his shirt and rested on his knees. He could hear footsteps, racing through the house and out to the yard. He held out his bloody hand and looked at it. Atkinson's voice pealed tlirough the wann clear air. "He's dead! Lovcral's dead!" There wa.s a sound of sudden activity, and everywhere went the cry. "Lovcral's dead!" Loveral sank to his haunches and opened his lips. The blood was there, too. He could hear the shouts and the laughter, and then the tearing of steel, the smashing of glass. He bent over his knees, trembling with a sudden chill. The sound of destruction grew like thunder. "Why?" he said in his dying throat. "Oh, w'hv? It was what they said  # they wanted?" Personalities in Science A Bell Rang # Feet Away, and Wireless Was Born bom, a servant in his parents' home in Bologna exclaimed, "What big ears he has!" His moAer answered, with an almost unbelievably prophetic pride, "With such ears he vl be able to hear the still small voice of the air." Marconi's father was a prosperous business man ; his mother, Anna Jameson, was the daughter of a well-known Dublin distiller's family. She was a staunch Scotch-Irisb Protestant and an exceedingly fine musician; she taught young Guglielmo to be an accomplished pianist, a student of the Bible, and to be both tenacious and persevering. Marconi was absorb in science by the time he was twelve. The only thing that seemed able to tear him way from his experiments was his fondness for an old blind man, and this one small leisure was explained when his parents discovered that the old man was a former telegrapher and was teaching young Gugliclmo Morse code. At twenty he read an obituary of the German Heinrich Hertz which described Hertz's experiments with electro-magnetic waves and became possessed with the idea that CugUelmo Marconi signals could be transmitted through the air without wires, just a.s Hertz had transmitted the spark. His fint experiment with the idea succeeded that same year. After months of heartbreaking failure he pressed a switch one night -- and a bell rang in a room # feet away. This first success was followed by others with distances constantly increasing. But when Marconi oflfered the Indian government the invention, it was decided after a brief discussion that the machine was not worthy of attention and bis offer was reused. His mother encouraged him to try her country, and in # he arrived in London with tw'o trunks full of instruments. The instruments had suffered mightily at the hands of the customs inspectors, and Marconi's first heartbreaking task was to replace them. Fortu nately, tlie British Government realized that he had a revolutionary invention which might one day make it possible to communicate with sliip.s at sea. Less than one year later a corporation was formed to exploit wireless telegraphy, and the first sending station was built on the Isle of Wight. And this young inventor of twenty-three found himself an immensely wealthy man. Despite occasional fiascos, the success of wireless received worldwide publicity; stations were built on the Continent and in England, and wireless equipment was installed in all British and Italian ships. But Marconi was not content; his dream was to unite Europe and America Iiy wireless. He had been warned that the curvature of the Earth would interfere with the waves ; people scolded him for not being content with what he had already wTought, and the cost of cstablisliing the transoceanic stations was prohibitive in the face of possible failure -- yet he was determined to try. Faced with disaster at the very outset when the station at the Southwest tip of England was destroyed in a storm, Marconi stubbornly spent a year rebuilding it, and then proceeded to Newfoundland which had been chosen as the American point for die trans-Atlantic effort. Weather conditions and technical difficulties that were almost insurmountable battled against him, but in #I the first signal -- three clicks like the three dots of Morse code -- came through to the English station and Guglielmo Marconi's dream was a reality. received with large doses of scepticism, and to still forever the doubting voices Marconi decided to build a regular station for permanent transmission at the site of the experimental station in Newfoundland. But more than scepticism had to be overcome. The cable company that owned the trans-Atkmtic cable threatened legal action if the wireless experiments didn't stop, and Marconi saw the dream fade. Canada, spurred by the faith of Motlier England in the experiments, offered # pounds and land in Nova Scotia for the American station. It took two long years of effort, disappointment and c.periment to complete the station -- and more heartbreak was in store for Marconi before success was achieved. Then the twenty-eightyear-old genius returned to Europe and a hero's iriuniph.s. Honors and titles were showered on him, and these served to spur him on to newer heights. After two years of unceasing work he decided to take a vacation, and typically chose one of the remote wireless stations as the perfect spot. Here at Pool he met ninetccn-year-old Beatrice O'Brien, and after a whirlwind courtship they were married. The honeymoon spot was, again characteristically, the station at Nova Scotia. While still on the honeymoon Marconi was recalled to London. The company's funds had run out and London banks refused new credit to further research and experiment. A frantic trip to Italy to seek further financing was fruitless; the-ltaliaji banks didn't tluiik he was a good risk either. Marconi's only hope seemed to lie in reorganizing the company himself. He was able to do it -- but it took everything that he had. Instead of better times, things just got blacker. His first son was stricken and died at three months; German and American cable companies were infringing on his patents, and the Glace Bay station which had cost so much in time, money, and effort was completely destroyed by fire. The indomitable spirit of perseverance and tenacity tliat was the mark of this man was scarcely dented by these disasters; instead they seemed to spur him on. He rolled up his sleeves and proceeded to fight the patent infringements with everything he could muster, began the rebuilding of the Glace Bay station, and did all in his power to convince the world tiiat wireless had commercial posabilitics. In less than a year the station had been rebuilt, the first lawsuit won, and Marconi was riding the crest of the wave again. The honor of receiving the Nobel Prize for physics in # merely interrupted the steamroller for a brief time. Having exploited all the possibilities of long radio waves, he started  work with short waves and by # had transmitted the human voice from England to Australia. Then came work with reflected radio waves which were to produce our present day radar, and experiments with ultra-short waves which were to be the key to television. Those who lived and worked with him admired his simplicity, patience, and warmheartedness; and perhaps the greatest tribute was paid to this self-taught man who had never been to a university by the London Times in an editorial written at the time of his death. "When the early twentieth century comes to be surveyed by historians yet unborn, Gugliclino Marconi may be regarded as the supremely significant character of the epoch, the name by which our age is called." -- epw who writes with unrivalled skill but much too rarely, returns with The Custodian. It's a tale of the last man on Earth -- but don't decide now that the theme is familiar: this man was in that position by choice! The long, lead novelette will be by Mari Wolf. Homo Inferior tells of a man who was alone in a different way, for I Eric was surrounded by his own people, but couldn't communicate with them! These and other fine stories in the November IF will thrill and surprise you. On sale everywhere September I I th. They were out of place in the Manly Age -- Stonecypher, a man who loved animals; Moe, a bull who hated men. T ogether, they marched to inevitably similar destinies... By Robert Ernest Gilbert lilustroted by Tom Beecham  reed sun hat with the square brim, and used a red handkerchief to absorb the perspiration streaking his forehead. He said, "The pup'll make a good guard, 'especially for thrill parties." L. Dan's golden curls flickered in July I sunlight. The puppy growled when Dan extended a gloved hand. "I don't want a guard," the hobbyist said. "I want him for a dogfight." A startling bellow rattled the windows of the dog house and spilled in deafening waves across the yard. Dan whirled, clutching his staff. Light glinted on his plastic cuirass and danced on his red nylon tights. His flabby face turned wWte. "What -- " he panted. Stonecypher concealed a smile behind a long corded hand and said, "Just the bull. Serenades is sometimes." Dan circled the dog house. Stonecypher followed with a forefinger pressed to thin lips. In the paddock, the bull's head moved up and down. It might or might not have been a nod. The crest of long red and blueblack hairs on the bull's neck and shoulders created an illusion of purple, but the rest of the animal matched the black of a duelmaster's tam. Behind large eyes encircled by a white band, his dtull bulged in a swelling dome, making the distance between his short horns seem much too great. "He's purple!" Dan gasped. "Why in the Government don't you put him in the ring?" Stonecypher gestured toward the choppy surface of Kings Lake, nine hundred feet below. He said, "Coincidence. I mate out the ringmaster's barge just leavin' Highland Pier." "You're selling him?" "Yeah. If they take 'im. I'd like to see 'im in the ring on Dependence Day." Glancing at tlic watch embedded in the left pectoral of his half-armor, Dan said, "That would be a show! I'll take the dog and fly. I've a duel in Highland Park at I I :#." "The pup's not for sale." "Not for sale!" Dan yelled. "You told -- " "Thought you w'anted a guard. I don't sell for dogfights." A sound like "Goood!" came from the paddocked bull. Dan opened his mouth wide. Whatever he intended to .say died witliout vocalization, for Catriona came driving the mule team up through the apple orchard. The almost identical mules had sorrel noses, gray necks, buckskin flanks, and black and white pinto backs and haunches. "Great Government!" Dan swore. "This place is worse than a museum!" "Appaloosa mules," Stonecypher said. Catriona jumped from the seat of the mowing machine. Dan stared. Compared to the standard woman of the Manly Age who, by dieting, posttiring, and exercise from childhood, transformed herself into a small, thin, dominated creature, Catriona constituted a separate species. She was taller than Dan, slightly plump, and her hair could have been classed as either red or blonde. Green overalls became her better than they did Stonecypher. With no trace of a smile on face or in voice, Stonecypher said, "L. Dan, meet Catriona." L ike a hypnopath's victim, Dan walked to Catriona. He looked up at her and whispered, but too loudly. Stonecypher heard. His hands clamped on the hobbyist's neck and jerked. Dan smashed in the grass with sufficient force to loosen the snaps of liis armor. He rolled to his feet and swung his staff. Stonecypher's left hand snatched the staff. His right fist collided with Dan'.s square jaw. Glaring down at the hobbyist, Stonecypher gripped the staff and rotated thick wrists outward. The tough plastic popped when it broke. Scuttling backward, Dan regained his feet. "You inhuman brute!" he growled. "I intended to pay for her!" "My wife's not for sale either," Stonecypher said. "You know how to fly." Dan thrust out a coated tongue and made a noise with it. In a memorized singsong, he declared, "I challenge you to a duel, in accordance with the laws of the Government, to be fought in the nearest duelpen at the earliest possible hour." "Stony, don't!" Catriona protested. "He's not wo'th it!" Stonecypher smiled at her. "Have to follow the law," he said. He extended his tongue, blurted, and announced, "As required by the Government, I accept your challenge." "We'll record it!" Dan snapped. He stalked toward the green and gold butterfUer parked in a field of seedling Sudan grass. Homs rattled on the concrete rails of the paddock. "Burstaard!" the bull bellowed. Dan shied and trampled young grass under sandaled feet. His loosened cuirass clattered rhythmically. Raising the canopy of the butterilier, he slid out the radioak and started typing. Stonecypher and Catriona approached the hobbyist. Catriona said, "This is cowa'dly! Stony nevah fought a duel in his life. He won't have a chance!" "You'll see me soon then, woman. Where'd you get all that equipment? You look like something in a circus." "Ah used to be in a cahnival," Catriona said. She kept Stonecypher in place with a plump arm across his chest. "That's wheah you belong," she told Dan. "That's all you'ah good fo'." "Watch how you address a man, woman," Dan snarled, "or you'll end in the duelpen, too." Stonecypher snatched the sheet from the typer. The request read : Duelmaster R. Smith, Watauga Duelpen, Highland Park, Tennessee. L. Dan challenges M. Stonecypher. Cause: Interference with basic amatory rights, July #. #:#I amest. Stonecypher said, "The cause is a lie. You got no rights with Catriona. Why didn't you tell 'em it's because I knocked you ears-overendways, and you're scared to fight without a gun?" Dan shoved the request into the slot and pulled the switch. "I'll kill you," he promised. While the request was transmitted by radiophotography, minutes passed, bare of further insults. Catriona and Stonecypher stood near the concrete fence enclosing the rolling top of Bays Mountain. Interminable labor had converted # acres of the top to arable land. Below the couple, the steep side of the mountain, denuded of timber, dangerously eroded, and scarred by limestone quarries, fell to the ragged shore of Kings Lake. Two miles of water agitated by many boats separated the shore and the peninsula, which resembled a wrinkled dragon with underslung lower jaw distended. The town of Highland Park clung to the jutting land, and the Highland Bullring appeared as a white dot more th four miles from where Catriona and Stonecypher stood. The ringmaster's barge was a red. rectangle skirting Russel Chapel Island. Dan pulled the answer from the buzzing radioak. He walked over and held the radiophoto an inch from Stonecypher's long nose. It read: Request OK. Time: July #. #:# pmest. Two attached permits granted each duelist the privilege of carrying one handgun with a capacity of not more than ten cartridges of not less than .# caliber. Below the permits appeared an additional message: L. Dan due at Watauga Duelpen. #:# amest. For duel with J. George . "Government and Taxes!" Dan cuRcd. Throwing Stonecyphcr's permit, he leaped into the green and gold butterflier and slammed the canopy. The four wings of the seini-ornithopter blurred with motion, lifting the craft into tlte sky. The forward wings locked wi negative dihedral, the rear wings angled to form a ruddevator, and the five-bladcd propeller whined, driving the butterflier in a shallow dive for the peninsula. late, and they shoot him. Ah knew youd finally have to fight, but -- " "You keep out of it next time," said Stonecypher. "I happen to know that feller's killed two women in the pen. He don't care for nothin'. Oughta known better than to let him come here. He made out like he wanted a guard dog, and I thought -- " "Nevah mind, Stony. Ah've got to help you. You nevah even fiahed a gun." "Later, Cat. The ringmaster may want to stay for dinner. I'll look after the mules." Catriona touched Stonecypher's cheek and went to the house. Stonecypher unharnessed the Appaloosa mules. While they rolled, he took, from an empty hay rack, a rubbertipped spear and a tattered cloth dummy. The dummy's single ann terminated in a red flag. Stonecypher concealed spear and dummy beneath the floor of the dog house. Going to the paddock, he patted the bull between the horns, which had been filed to a needle point. "Still goin' through with it?" Stonecypher asked. "Yaaaa," the bull lowed. "Yaooo kuhl Daan. Err'll kuhl uhhh kuhlerrs." "All right, Moe. Til kill Dan, and you kill the killers." Stonecypher stroked the jnassive hemisphere of the bull's jaw. "Goodbye, Moe." "Gooodba," the hull echoed. He lovered his nose to the shelled com seasoned with molasses, the rolled oats, and the ground barley in the trough. Stonecypher walked down the road to the staircase of stone that dammed the old Kingsport Reservoir, abandoned long before Kings Lake covered the city. A red electric truck crawled up the steep road hewn from the slope the gap formed by Dolan Branch. NN'hcn the truck had crossed the bridge below the buttressed dam, Slonecyyjher sjx)kc to the fat and sweltering man seated beside the driver. "I'm M. Stonecypher. Proud for you to visit my farm. Dinner's ready up at the hotise." "No, no time," smiled the fat man, displaying stainless .steel teeth. "Only time to sec the bull. I thought we weren't going to make that grade! Why don't those scientists develop synthetic elements, so that we can have atomic power again? This radio-electric i.s so unreliable! I am Ringmaster A. Oswell. naturally. This heat is excruciating! I had hoped it would be cooler up here, but something seems to have happened to our inland-oceanic climate this summer. Lead us to the bull, Stonecypher!" Clinging to the slatted truck bed, Stonecypher directed the stoic driver to paddock. The electric motor rattled and stopped, and Ringmaster Oswcll wheezed and squiitned from the cab. The ringmaster wore a vaguely Arabic costume, in ail variations of red. The bull lumbered bellowing around the fence. His horns raked white gashes in the beech tree forming one corner. He tossed the feed trough to splintering destruction. "Magnificent!" Oswcll gasped. Then the ringmaster frowned. "But he looks almost purple. His horns are rather short." "Stay back from the fence!" Stonecypher warned. "He's real wide between the horns, ringmaster. I reckon tlie spread'll match up to standard. Same stock my grandfather used to sell Boon Bullring before the water. Wouldn't sell 'ini, only the tenants are scared to come about the house." Oswell fingered his balloon neck and inumblecl, "But he's odd. That long hair on his neck... I don't know..." The bull's horns lifted the mineral feeder from the center of the paddock. The box rotated over the rails and crashed in a cloud of floured oyster shells and phosphate .salt at the ringmaster's feet. Oswell took cover behind the truck driver, who said, "Fergus'd like him. Jeeze! Remember dat brown and white spotted one he kilt last year on Forrest Day? Da crowd like ta never stopt yelling!" Ringmaster Oswell retreated farther, as, under the bull's onslaught, a piece of concrete broke from the top rail, exposing the reinforcing rod within. "Fergus does like strange ones," he admitted. Stonecypher said, "Don't let the mane bother you. There's one of these long-haired Scotch cows in his ancestors. He's not really purple. Just the way the light hits 'im." Oswell chew lacquered fingernails with .steel dentures. His bloodshot eyes studied the spotted and speckled .ppaloosa mules chasing around the pasture, but the sight failed to register on his brain. "The crowd likes a good show on Dependence Day," he proclaimed. "I considered trying a fat Aberdeen Angus with artificial horns for laughs, but this may do as well. I must find some sliade! I'll take him, Stonecypher, if fifteen hundred in gold is agreeal)le." "Sold," Stonecypher said. The word cracked in the middle. Vhile the ringmaster, muttering about trying bulldogs sometime, retired to the narrow shadow of the dog house, the driver backed the truck to the ramp. Stonecypher opened the gate and waved his handkerchief. The bull charged into the truck, and the driver locked the heavy doors. From within his red burnoose, Oswell produced a clinking bag. "Fifteen hundred," he said. From other recesses, he withdrew documents, notebook, and a pencil. He said. "Here is a pass for you and one for any woman-subject you may wish to bring. You'll want to see your first bull on Dependence Day! And here is the standard release absolving you of any damage the bull may do. Oh, yes! His name and number?" "Number?" "Yes, his brand." "Not branded. Make it Number #. Name's Moe." Oswell chuckled. "Moe. Very good! Most breeders name them things like Chainlightning and Thunderbird. Your GE number?" "I'm not a Government Employee." "You're not?" Oswell wheezed. "How unusual! Your colors? He'll wear your colors In his shoulder." "Yeah. Black." "Black?" "Dead black." Oswell, scribbling, managed a faint smile. "Sorry I can't accept that invitation to lunch." He struggled into the truck. "Hope this bull is brave in the ring. Nice antique old place you have here! I don't see a feed tower, but you surely don't use pasture -- " The ringmaster's babble passed down the road with the truck. Stonecypher watched the vehicle descend the dangerous grade. He lifted his square hat from his black hair, dropped it on the ground, and crushed the reeds under a booted foot. The temporary house, a squat cubical structure, stood at the end of a spruce-lined path beside the ruin that a thrill party had made of the century-old farm house. The plastic screen squeaked when Stonecypher opened it. He stood on the white floor of the robot kitchen and dug a fifty dollar gold piece from the bag Oswell had given him. Glaring at the head of the woman with Liberty inscribed on her crown, he muttered, "Thirty pieces of gold." Catriona called, "Oswell's lucky he couldn't stay foah diimah! Ah had the potassium cyanide all ready." Stonecypher passed through the diner door into a room containing more yellowed history books and agricultural pamphlets than eating utensils. Catriona waited by the table. She held a large revolver in her right hand. Knob, near the ruins of the old FM transmitter station, looking down at the Tennessee Lakes. Catriona sat behind him and held the revolver on her thigh. Stonecypher said, "I never see it but I wonder how it looked before the water." Before him, North Fork, an arm of Kings Lake, twisted across the Virginia line four and one-half miles away, while to Stonecypher's right, Boone Lake sparkled like a gigantic, badly drawn V. He did not look toward Surgoinsville Dam securing Kings Lake far to the west. The Tennessee Lakes were born in # when Wilson Dam spanned the Tennessee River at Muscle Shoals, Alabama; but their growth was retarded for fifteen years, until an Act of Congress injected them with vitamins. Then the mile-long bastions of concrete crawled between the ridges. Norris, Wheeler, Pickwick Landing, Guntersville, Watts Bar, Kentucky, Cherokee, Fort Henry, Boone, Sevier, Surgoinsville -- almost innumerable dams blocked the rivers. The rivers stopped and overflowed. The creeks swelled into rivers. Congressional Committees investigated, the Supreme Court tested the dams against the Constitution, ethnologists and archeologists ha.stily checked for Indian relics; and the dams, infused with youthful vigor, matured. Beginning with Norris, which backed up the Clinch and Powell Rivers to inundate # acre.s and displace # families, the dams expanded mighty aquatic muscles. The Tennessee, the Little Tennessee, the Nolichucky, the Holston, the French Broad, the Watauga, the Hiwassce, the Little Pigeon -- all the rivers spread their waters into lengthy, ragged lakes, changing the map of Tennessee more than any natural cataclysm, such as the great earthquake of #, had ever done. The Lakes provided jobs, electric power, flood control, soil conservation, a fi.shcrman's paradise, milder winters, cooler summers, and they covered all the really good farming land in the eastern part of the .state. Gatriona loaded the revolver. It was an obsolete .# Magnum with a Sji inch barrel, and the cartridge cases of the metal-piercing bullets had a greenish sheen. "Now, put it in the holstah, and be ca'eful," Catriona said. Stonecypher wore the holster, a leather silhouette studded with two spring clips opening forward, on a belt and secured to his leg by a thong. Gingerly, he took the revolver and dipped it under the clips. "I've kept outa duels all my life," he said, "but, so long as it's for you, I don't much mind." "Ah'll mind if he kills you. You do like I tell you, and you can beat him. Whv, niah best act in the How-To Cahnival was How to Win a Duel. Cou'se, they didn't know ah was really drawin' befoah the buzzah sounded. Why, ah used to set two plates ten yahds apaht, draw two revolvahs, and shoot both plates, all in foah-tenths of a second!" Stonecypher grinned. "Sorry I missed that carnival first time it came through here. I coulda seen you in that costume they poured on you, three years earlier." "Nevah mind the veiled compliments. Now, try it!" Stonecypher faced the target, a sheet of p!astil)oard roughly sawed to the shape of a man, and backed by a heap of earth removed from the new, as yet dry, pond in which they stood. Catriona pressed a small buzzer concealed in her palm. Stonecypher's big hand closed on the revolver butt, pushing the weapon up and forward. The sound of the shot rattled away over the mountain top. "That's good!" Gatriona cried, consulting the sonic timer. "One and two-tenths seconds from buzzah to shot!" "But I missed," Stonecypher protested. "Look bad on te'ee." "You'll hit him. Watch the recoil next time." Stonecypher drew and fired a second wild shot. He snorted, "Confound Westerns, anyhow!" "Weste'ns?" "Sure. That's where this duelin started. Used to, almost ever movie or tevee was called a Western. Sort of a fantasy, because they were just slightly based on real history. They generally showed a feller in a flowered shirt, ridin' a Tennessee Walking Horse, and shootin' a gun. Ever'bodv in these Westerns had a gun, and they all shot at each Other. "The youngin's were hep on 'em, so they all wore toy guns, and a whole generation grew up on Westerns. When they got big, they carried real guns. I've heard my great-uncle tell about it, how before the Government built duelpens and passed laws, you couldn't hardly cross the Lakes without ninnin' Into a bunch of fools on water calves skis shootin' at each other." grazec "You leave the histo'y books alone foah awhile," Catriona commanded, "and practice. The tenants and all'll tend to the wo'k. Try it loaded and empty. Hook this little buzzah to the timeah, and practice. Ah've got to go see the chickens." " 'Bye, teacher." Stonccypher dropped the buzzer in his pocket and watched her vanish into the grove. He fired the remaining shots, nicking the target once. With the revolver bolstered, he followed the padi to the summer pasture. Stonecypher cupped his liands around his mouth and yelled, "Smart-calves! Smart-calves to school!" The entire herd turned sorrowful e)TS on him. Seven of the calves and four of the yearlings trotted to the gate, which Stonccyphrr held open, and jostled out of the pasture. As the calves began to lie down under the trees, a white heifer-caJf nuzzled Stonecypher's hand and bawled, "Paaapy gyoing a fyightt?" "Yeah, he's goin' to fight," Stonecypher answered. "Your pappy's gone to the bullring. He suggested it, and made die choice himself. He's got real courage. You oughta all be proud of him." The calves haw'led their pnde. Including those remaining in the pasture, they presented a colorful variety of spots, specks, splotches, browns, reds, blacks, and even occasional blue and grccnidi tinges. Stonccypher .sat facing them from a stump. He said, "I'm sorta late for the lesson, today, so we'll get on with it. Some of this will be repetition for you yearlings, but it won't hurt. If you get too bored, tlicre's corn and cottonseed meal in die trough, only be (juiet about it. "Now. To look at yu all. nobody would think vou'rc the same breed of cattle; but you. and your maminys, and Moe are the only Atohmy cattle on Earth. It's usually hard to say exactly when a breed started ; but you all started a long, long time ago, on July #, #, near Alamogordo. New Mexico, when they exploded the first Atomic Bomb." At mention of Atomic Bomb, who had succeeded the Bogger Man as a means of frightening cdiildren, one of the younger calves bawled. Her polled, brindled mother ran in ungainly fashion to the fence and mooed widi great carrying power. "All right!" Stonccypher yelled. The cow closed her big mouth, but stayed by the gate. "Can't go by what you hear the tenants tell their kids," Stonccypher cautioned the calf, "Atomic Bomb is as dead as the tank and the battleship. "Now, like I was sayin', the scientists put Atomic Bomb on a hundred foot tower and blowcd him up. There was a flash of fire, and an awful racket, and the blast mist'd up a lot of dirt and dust from the ground. All this dust achumin' around in the cloud buinpt'd into little bits of metal and stulT that was highly radioactive. That means, the basic atoms of matter had been thrown out (rf kilter, .sorta deranged. The protons and electrons in an atom oughta be about equal for it to be stable, but these were shootin' off electrons, or beta particles, and givin' off something like powerful x-rays, called gamma rays, and things like that. "Anyhow, this radiation affected all the sand and bits of rock and dirt in that l)omb cloud. This radiation is dangerous. Some of it will go right through several inches of lead. Enough'll kill you. Your ancestors were ten miles or so from w'here Atomic Bomb w'ent off. "They were just plain Whileface cattle. They weren't supposed to be there, but I reckon none of the scientists bothered to warn 'em. The dust started settlin' all over your ancestors. In about a week, there were sores and blisters on their backs. The red hair dropped off. When it grew back, it was gray. "The scientists got real excited when they heard about it, 'cause they wanted to see how horrible they could make Atomic Bomb. So, they shipped fifty-nine cattle up to Oak Ridge. That was a Government town, a hundred miles .southwest of here, where they made some of the stuff to put in Atomic Bomb. The University of Tennessee was runnin' an experimental farm there. They had donkeys, and pigs, and chickens, and other animals that they exposed to radioactivity. Then they killed 'em and cut 'em up to see what had happened. I know it's gruesome, but that's how it was. "The awful fact is, the scicnti.sts slaughtered more than half that original Atohmy herd for experiments. Some of the rest, they -- uh -- married. Wanted to see if the calves had two heads, or something; if radioactivity had speeded up the mutation rate. "Back then, they didn't understand much about mutation. Some claimed a little radioactivity would cause it, some said a whole lot, and some said it wouldn't hurt a bit." "Whaa mootyaaonn?" asked the calf which was not yet assured of the extinction of Atomic Bomb. "Well, you-all are all mutations. I've told you how life starts from one cell. This cell has thread-like things in it called chromosomes, and the chromosomes are made up of things called genes. Mutations, sort of unexpected changes, can take place in either the chromosomes or the genes. You see, when this one cell starts dividing, every gene makes a copy of itself; but, sometimes, the copy is a little different from the original. Lots of things, like x-rays and ultraviolet rays, heat, chemicals, disease, can cause this. Radioactivity had caused mutation in some experiment, so the scientists were anxious to see what happened with these cattle. "Genes determine the way an animal develops. Two mutant genes can start reactions that end up as a man with one leg, or maybe as a bull with the intelligence of an eight-year-old man. Lots of mutations are recessive. They may be carried along for generations. But, when two like mutant genes come together in reproduction, the animal is bound to be something different, the way you eleven calves are. "Now. The scientists watched the Atohmy cattle for fifteen or twenty years, and nothin' much happened. They started sayin radioactivity wasn't dangerous, and a man could walk into a place right after Atomic Bomb went off, and it wouldn't matter. They should be here to see the mess in Japan today. All the time, though, I think the cattle were changing. It may have been in little things like the length of hair, or the shape of an eyeball, or the curve of a horn, so the scientists couldn't tell without they made exact measurements all the time. "Then, a bull-calf was bom. He had shaggy black hair, and his horns grew in a spiral like a ram's. Some scientists said, 'I told you so! It speeded the mutation rate!' "Others said, 'He's a natural mutation, or else, a throw-back to prehistoric wild cattle. It happens in every breed. Atomic Bomb Iiad nothing to do with it.' "They married the bull, and then they fixed to slaughter 'im to see what his insides was like. The bull fooled 'em, though. He came down with contagious pleuro-pneumonia, the first case in years, 'cause it was supposed to have been wiped out in this country away back in the Nineteenth Century. They had to cremate the bull for fear die disease would spread. Ever' one of the calves were normal Whitefaces. "Finally, the nineteen Atohmy cattle that were left were put up for sale. My great-grandfather, Cary McPhecter, bought 'era and shipped 'em here to Bays Mountain. He's the man started this farm where there was nothin' but rattlesnakes, and trees, and rocks." "Whyy theyea selll um?" a red roan calf interrupted. "Well, they sold 'em 'cause Oak Ridge had been condemned. That was several years after the German Civil War. It was peace time, for a change, and folks were .rick of Atomic Bomb. Anyhow, new, modern plants for makin' the stuff had been built in secret places a lot easier to defend. The women were cryin' for more automatic kitchens, so the Bureau of Interior Hydroelectric Power (that's the name Federal Pow'er, Inc., went by then) put another dam across the Clinch River below Norris. Bush Lake covered up Oak Ridge. "There wasn't much mutation, except for color, in you Atohmy cattle, till seven years ago when your pappy, Moe, was born. I remember -- " A hoarse excited voice shouted from a distance. "Thrill party!" it cried. "Thrill party!" stump, stamped his rigt foot to restore circulation, and yelled on the run, "That's all todayl Stay under the trees!" He loped along the pasture fence and across the makeshift target range. Two tenants. Teddy and Will, stood on the dirt heap with pitchforks in their hands. Over Bay Knob, an old Model # butterflier hovered on ribrating wings. Sloppy white letters on the sides of the aircraft spelled such slang expression.'i percOlossalSoniC Flap ship," and An impossible number of middleschool-age boy's bulged from the cabin windows. Methodically, they dumpi'd trash and garbage over the transmitter station ruins. The butterfiier wheeled and flapped over the pasture. Red clover bent and writhed in the artificial wind from the omithopter wings. Cows bawled and ran wild. Calves fell over each other. Stonecypher jumped the fence. He w'rested the revolver from the holster. "Clear out, or I'll shoot!" he ho'vvled. Voices spilled from the butterflier. "He got a handgun!" "Dis ain't legal!" "Whatcha say, tall, bones, and ugly?" Stonecypher aimed the Magnum at the shaven head in the pilot's seat. The boys looked faint. Agitated air thundered as the butterflier lifted straight up two hundred feet and glided away in the directon of Surgoinsville Dam. Teddy and Will stood by with pitchforks unrelaxed. Will spat a globule of tobacco juice. "The thangs these here psychologists git made law!" he sneered. "You want me to make out a Thrill Damage Claim?" "No, Will," Stonecypher said, "just deduct it from taxes." Teddy looked at the revolver and said, "Ever'body oughta take guns to em crazy youngin's. Reckon you'll git into trouble?" "No. It's an empty antique. That's legal. You guys did all right. Let the calves back in, huh?" The tenants left by the gate, and, with a minimum of driving, urged the calves into the pasture. Stonecypher watched the men pass through the grove. Although the tenants undoubtedly recognized the peculiarities of the calves, they never mentioned them. Since the late #'s, through Revolution, Civil War, automobile, the Department of Internal Revenue, the multiple bureaus that had controlled the Lakes, the Moon rocket, and the expedition to Pluto, these people had remained suspiciously interested in strangers, suspicious of indoor plumbing, doubtful of the Government, quick-tempered, and as immovable as Chimney Top. They had exchanged little except log and frame houses for concrete. The tenants, not really tenants, had been squatting on Bays Mountain when Cary McPheeter bought the farm ; and there they stayed. Stonecypher vaulted the fence. Catriona, with hands firmly planted on hips, stood in the dry pond. Stonecypher said, "If I just knew what these thrill parties think they're up to, it might help." Catriona shook her head of redyellow hair. "Nevah mind them. Ah told you to practice shootin, but the minute ah turn mah back, you run off and staht teachin' those calves! You've got to practice, Stony! You've nevah done any shootin', and L. Dan's killed ten people. Ah -- " "Watch the tears, or you'll have red and green eyes," Stonecypher said. Clumsily, he ejected the shells and reloaded the revolver. He occupied two seconds in drawing and firing. The bullet struck dirt a yard to the left erf the target. lashed Bays Mountain on the afternoon of July #. As the storm passed, a blood-red butterflier, with a pusher propeller in the tail and a plastic bull head on the nose, descended in the young Sudan grass. Stonecypher dropped the saw -- he had been clearing away a beech limb the storm left in the abandoned paddock -- and strolled to greet Ringmaster A. Oswell. "Stonecypher!" the ringmaster announced. "That storm almost caught us!" Oswell's stainless steel teeth clacked, and the breezes trailing the thunderclouds ballooned his orange silk kimono. "I never liked these butterfliers. Theyre too slow, and that swooping motion! Five hundred miles per hour may seem fast to a man your age; but in my day, back before petroleum was classified as armament, we had jets! Real speed!" "Come on up to the house, ringmastbr," Stonecypher invited. "I'll mix up some dextrose and citric acid." "No. no time," the fat man panted. "Only time to see you about that bull you sold me. Tlie storm took a limb of your beech tree! Almost the only one left, I suppose. About that bull, Stonccyphcr. you know I was a bit hesitant when I bought him, but my driver talked me into it. I'm so disappointed I had him drafted immediately!" "But, what -- " Stonccyphcr attempted to ask. "The young woman there in the butterflier is a much better driver and pilot," Oswell bal)blcd. "I wouldn't have believ'cd it of a woman! She weighs a good ninetyeight pounds, too! That bull -- he has changed completely since we put him under the stands. He eats well, but he shnw.s no spirit at all. Tomorrow is the big day. Stonecypher! I can't disappoint the crowd! I thought he might be sick, but the vet says not. Tliat bull let the vet come into the cage and made absolutely no attempt to kill him!" "But does Fergus -- " "Fergus's manager saw the bull! He's all for it. Fergus made an extremely poor showing on Memorial Day, and the manager thinks this odd bull would provide a real comeback! I advised against it This heat is terrible! The storm didn't cool the air at all." Stonccyphcr maneuvered the perspiring ringmaster into the shade of the beech. He said, "I wanta do the fair thing with you, ringmaster, so I'll give you a guarantee, in writing if you want. If that bull's not the bravest ever fought in Highland Bullring, I give you double-money-back." Oswell's face wobbled in a tentative smile. He counted his stubby fingers. "Double-moneyback?" "Yeah. I wanta get into the business. My grandfather used to sell bulls, Then my father came along, and he wouldn't sell a one." "Yes. Yes, I once tried to reason with him, but -- " "He had funny ideas," Stonecypher pressed his advantage. "I never did understand the old man myself. He used to lecture me on something he called the Man-Animal War. He said one of the wwst things in the w ar was the thousands of bulls that had been tortured to death." "Peculiar idea. Of course --  "He claimed bullfights slipped up on this country. Back when it wasn't legal, they spaded up the ground real go. There were movies, and books, and magazines, and foreign broadcasts, all ravin' about how brave and noble it was for a bunch of men to worry and torture a stupid animal like a bull, till he couldn't hardly bold bis head up, and then run a sword in im." "Naturally, you -- " "I don't luiow how' many times he told me a bull had more brains than a horse, but less then a jackass. He said buUfightin' wasn't a sport, even if the bull got a man sometimes ; and he had the idea the worst thing was the four or five horses, that ever' bull killed, took with im. They had some bloodless bullfights in California, and the nut colonies out there like it so good, first thing you know, we really had it. It came to East Tennessee 'cause this was one of the biggest cattleraisin' sections, before the Lakes took the grazin' land." "Surely, Stonecypher, you -- " "My father always claimed if the bullfighters were near as brave as they said, they'd take on a really intelligent animal sometimes, like a man-eatin' tiger. He even thought in the first place." Stonecypher grinned. "No, you don't ne to worry about me, ringmaster. I hate to admit it, but the old man is the Oswell revealed all of his steel teeth in a broad smile. "You had me worried!" he wheezed. "Now, your offer." "I'll go even better," Stonecypher said, "just to show how set I am on gettin' back in the business. If Moe's not brave, I got two yearlin's you can have for free." "How generous! You've reassured me, Stonecypher. I have confidence, now, that the show will be a great success! I must go! You have no conception of the life a ringmaster leads before a fight. I won't require a written gfuarantee. I trust you, Stonecypher! See you tomorrow, I hope! I never liked July. If the Government would only make more Lakes, it might cool off! I hope -- " The whir of the red btrtterflier's wings terminated Oswell's discourse. With a face like a gored bullkiller, Stonecypher watched the ringmaster's departure. Another butterfiier hpvered above the mountain. This one was green and gold with the canopy pushed back and a glint of twin lenses in the cockpit. Will appeared at Stonecypher's side. He spat in a long arc and said, "That's a new one, ain't it, peepin' from a butterfly? I reckon L. Dan never got kilt in that other duel like I hoped he would. You want us to git you outa this, Stonecypher?" "No, Will." "We can see you git to the Smokies. The Givemment'll never find you down in there."  "I'll be aU right, Will. If he does kill me, take care of Catriona. And look after the calf records." "Sure thang." Stonecypher walked slowly toward Catriona's open-topped sunbathing tent justed his black tarn. "Do not touch your shooting hand to your weapon until the buzzer sounds," he instructed. "Otherwise, the weapon may be carried as you wish. At the slightest infringement of the rules, a robot gun will kill you. If you have any elaborate last words, say them now; because the pen is soundproof." He laughed an obviously much rehearsed laugh. L. Dan wore orange tights today, but no armor, since the rules required deulists to present naked torsos for probable bullets. Stone cypher faced the duelinaster. "I reckon this room is the only place a man really has free speech," he said. "You're deaf, and can't sec good enough to read lips, and me or him will soon be dead. "I don't believe in this duclin'. It pves a man who's wrong a chance to kill one who's right. A man shouldn't oughta have to die because he's right. Just like ever'thing else in this Manly Age. It's painful. That oughta be our motto, More Pain, ju.st like in the Macliine Age it was More Gadgets At Any Cost." "Why don't you go on tevee?" Dan jeered. "She'll soon forget you, farmer." Stonccypher's words rolled over the hobbyist. "I reckon the Manly Age came because a man started thinkin' he wasn't much of a man any more. He was just as fast as his car, and just as strong as his electric lawn mower. And a loud minority of the women was claimin' they could do anything a man could, and maybe better. So tlie men started playin' football in shorts and huntin' c.ach other on game preserves, and the women went back to the kitchen and bedroom. Lots of things that went on undercover come out in the open. Cockfights, dogfights, coon-on-alog, duels, stallion fights, bullfights. "And people like you, L. Dan, went on livin'. You got no right to live. You don't do any useful work. The Earth is slowly starvin', and you take the grub out of some feller's mouth who might could help a little. That's why -- " "Time!" announced the duelmaster with his face close to a large clock on the wall. He opened the door. Two men carrying a body on a stretcher passed. The body had four bullet wounds in it. Dan said, "That drivel gives me a real reason to kill you, farmer. I'll be good to her for a few days." As prearranged, Dan took the  right branch of the corridor and Stonecypher, the left. A hooded snan gave Stonecypher the Magnum revolver and shut him into a space resembling a windowed closet with a door on cither side. Stonecypher secured the revolver in the clip holster. His bony hands formed knotted fists. The pen door slid back. Stonecy#hor stepped into a room thirty by ninety feet with three bulletmarred concrete walls and a fourth wall of bulletproof glass, behind which sat the ghoulish audience. Dan, crouched and with his pistol in the crook of his left elbow, advanced. His right hand fluttered an inch from the pistol butt. Stonecypher, grotesque with thin chest exposed and overall bib wrapped around belt, waited. Two photoelectric robot machine guns followed each movement of the duelists. A buzzer sounded. Dan's index finger failed to reach the trigger, for a guardian machine gun removed the hobbyist's head in a short efficient burst. The noise of a louder buzzer punctuated the execution. When the soxmdproof inner door of the closet opened, the hooded man, who had a pair of crossed pistols tattooed on the back of his right hand, said, "He was too anxious." "Yeah," Stonecypher grunted. The man watched Stonecypher pass out to the street. Stonecypher snapped up the bib of his overalls. An extremely rare bird, a robin, hopped from his path and continued a fruitless search for insects. Stonecypher walked down Watauga Street until the pavement vanished under the brownish-green water of Kings Lake. Catriona squealed when she saw him. Ignoring all Correct Procedures, she almost knocked him down and attempted to smother him. "Ah told you it just took practice!" she blubbered. "You did it, Stony!" With muffled mumbles, Stonecypher managed to put her in the Tenite canoe. The few people along the quay, who had witnessed the illegal manner of their meeting, watched with shock, or with incredulity, or with guarded admiration. When they saw that Stonecypher's hand rested on a bolstered revolver, they lost their curiosUy. Wading, Stonecypher shoved e canoe off and hopped aboard. As he took up the paddle, Ills hand trailed in the water and released the small buzzer that had made possible Catriona's best carnival act. F or July, the afternoon was cool. Blue-gray clouds drifted before larger di white masses. To the southwest opened the mile-wide mouth of Horse Creek; and, far beyond, the great blue pyramid of Chimney Top Mountain stood defiantly above Sevier Lake. The world seemed water broken only by partly submerged hills and mountains. Stonecypher gazed across the Lake at Bays Mountain and at the five Cement Islands apparently Boating against that backdrop. Softly, he said, "Some follw call the big one Martyrs Island. There's a marble pillar right in the middle. Nobody knows who put it there, and the Government never bothered to knock it down. I reckon the poison ivy's covered it by now, but I went and read the inscription, once, when I was a boy. It says: "They moved me off the Powell River. They covered my farm with water. I bought me another near Beans Station. The water covered it. I was getting old, but I built at Galloway Mill. When they flooded that, I gave up and lived in Kingsport. I will not move again." The canoe bounded over the choppy water, one hundred feet above the silted streets of the flooded city of Kingsport. Stonecypher said, "The time I was there, you could still find a few coptertrooper helmets and old cankered shells. Couple of years back, a diver brought up two skulls off shore." Catriona's eyes remained moist, but she smiled. Her teeth were beautiful. "It'll be all rahght. Stony. You can't change the wo'ld in one dav. You did fine, and Moe will too." "I told you to stay at the bullring," Stonecypher said. "Ah couldn't watch that! And those puny, little, mousy women stare and talk about me, because thcah's a little meat on mah cahcass. Oswell said Moe would be last, anyhow. Ah was so wo'ied about you, ah couldn't sit still." Only a few boats, mainly those of piscatorial maniacs, were on the lake. Stonecypher glared at them and muttered, "I hope I did right by Moe. He wanted to fight. Maybe, Catriona, if I'd had you when I found out he could talk -- not ju.st mimic -- I'd of raised him difl'crcnt. Maybe I shouldn't have shown him that bullfight movie, but I wondered what the only bull to see a bullfight from outside llie ring thought about it. "That led him to wantin' to know all about the Man-Animal War. I told him the best I could, how one of a man's basic drives is to exterminate, ever' since prehistoric times when he did in the vvooly mammoth and rhinoceros. Tlie dodo, quagga, passenger pijii'on, great auk, aurochs. Key df'rr, bisin. African elephant, gorilla, tiger therc'.s an awful list. Why, five hundred species of iiummals, alotu, have become estinrt siiue I .A. I)., 'bout four hundred of tlu-m siu' A man'll even kill oil' oiIht men, like die Neanderthals and the Tasmanians!" Sionecyplier resti-d die paddle and grinned, faintly, at Catriona reclining in the bow. "I guess you've heard diis before." "Go rahght ahead, Stony," Catriona sighed. "Ah like to heah yoali speech. It's the only time you really get angry, and you look so fine and noble." "Yeah. Well. I told Moe how a man exterminates useful or harmles.s species, and then he lets dangerous ones, like rats, eat lum out of hoii.se and home. Course, I explained this was just kinship. Folks used to argue man come from a monkey, or from spontaneous combusdon, or something. Now we got fossil proof he's not like anything anybody ever saw. He's a case of straight line development all the way back to the first mammal, a sort of rat." The canoe glided past Highland Pier. Every type of small watercraft, from a punt, through an electric motorboat, to a sloop, had docked. More boats lined the shore on either side of the pier. The flying field contained so many butterfliers and copters that there seemed no possibility of any of them taking ofl'. Human voices welled in a mob roar from the great open cylinder of the bullring. A huge banner draped on die curving white wall proclaimed, in ten-foot letters: Stonecypher ran the canoe aground in a patch of dead weeds, I 'xixiscd by a slight lowering of the lake level, and helped Catriona over the rocks that lined the bank. Me said, "I told Moe other things men do to animals. All the laboratory butchery, done because it would be cruel to treat a man like that, but it's all right with a animal, like takin' out a dog's brains and lettin' 'im live. I told him about huntin', how the kudu become extinct 'cause a bunch of fools wanted to see w'ho could kill the one with the biggest horns. "I told him the things done to domestic animals. Dehornin', emasculatin', brandin', slaughterin' with sledge hammers and butcher knives, keepin' 'em in filthy bams. A man tells hisself he's superior to other animals. If he does somethin' bad, he u.ses words like inhuman, brutal, animal instincts, instead of admittin' it's just typical behavior. And the psychologists take some animal, say a dog, and put him in a maze, sometliing the dog never saw before. If the dog don't run the maze in two seconds flat, they say he's a pretty stupid animal. He just operates on instinct, but they can't say how instinct operates. They'll have a time explainin' Moc's instincts. "I reckon the American bison made Moe madder than anything. They killed the bison off, 'cept for protected herds, in the Nineteenth Century. A hundred years lalir, the herds had got pretty big, so they declared open season on bison. No more bison." A recorded voice growled, "No guns permitted in ring. Deposit gun in slot. No guns permitted in ring." Stonecypher moved his permit in ineffectual passes before the electric eye. He shrugged, dropped the revolver into the riot, and left his thumb print. Catriona displayed the passes Ringmaster Oswell had given them. The tcveer blinked, and the gate granted admission. They rode the escalator to the sixth tier and squirmed through pandemonium to their seats. The male portion of the crowd wore every possible style and color of dress, in complete emancipation from the old business suit uniform, but the women wore sober falsebosomed sundresses and expressed excitement in polite chirps. Stonecypher pressed his mouth against Catriona's ear and whispered through the din, "You got to understand, Cat, whatever happens, Moe wanted it. He says he can scare some killers into givin' up bullfights and maybe help stop it." "He'll do fine, Stony." Several spectators stopped venting tlieir wrath on the unfortunate man in the ring to gawk at the couple. Catriona's unorthodox phyrique aroused sufficient amazement; but, in addition, Stonecypher gave her the front seat and took the rear one, the correct place for a woman, himself. Below, through a rain of plastibottles and rotten eggs, a tired man walked to the barrier which Oswell adverti.sed as the onlv wooden fence in seven states. Behind the killer, a small electric tractor dragged out the bloody carca.ss of a bull. A gasping, gibbering little man grabbed Stonecypher's arm and yelped, "Illard is the clumsie.st killer, he ran the sword in three times, and the kid with the dagger had to stick twee before they finished, Big Dependence Day Bullfight my jet! This is the worst in years, Fergus made the only clean kill all afternoon, and I flew every one of eighteen hundred miles myself to see it, this last bull better be good!" The little man waved his bag of rotten eggs. Although the bullfight followed the basic procedures established by Francisco Romero in the Spain of #, changes had occurred, including the elimination of all Spanish words from the vocabulary of the spectacle since the unpleasant dispute with the Spanish Empire twenty years Ixifore. The gaudy costpmes worn by participants had been replaced by trunks and sneakers. A purring grader smoothed the Simd. The crowd fjuieted, except for those iicai' the box of Ringmaster Oswcll. 'I'hcy suggested in obsi enc tejTiis that the ir immov be refunded. A trumpet recording blared. A Miulct dot)r, inscriled, "Moe of Bays Mountain Fann," opened. #'lu irowd awaited the first wild rusli of ilie bull. It failed to materialize. vmxw nAi.E the doorway. Above, (ni a platform inside tlie hanier, stocd a gray-haireci man who stuck identifying, streamered il-ul' into bovine shoulders. His hand ssc)i down, carrying StonccypluT's chosrn colors, black. Moc's walk upset the man's timing. His arm moved too stum. Mtw'.s front hooves left tin gmund. Honrs hooked. The gray-liaircl man screamed and dro)Ml the dart. With a spike of horn through his arm, betw'eon bone and biceps, he gyrated across the barrier. He screamed a second time befeu'e cloven hooves slashed across his body. Tlie crowd inhaled, then cheered the unprecedented entrance. Killer Fergus's team stood rigid, not comprehending. Then men dashed through slticlded openings in the barrier, yelling and waving pink and yellow capes to draw the bull from his victim. Moe ignored the distraction, trotted nonchalantly to tlie center . of the ring, and turned his bulging head to examine the spectators jabbering at his strange appearance. The short horns, the round skull, the white-banded eyes, the mane that seemed slightly purple under the cloudy sky, and the exaggerated slope from neck to rump that made the hind legs too short -- together they amounted to a ton of muscle almost like a bull. "Wherc'd you trap it, Oswell?" someone near the ringma.ster's box yelled. Forgetting the mess Illard had made with tlie previous bull, the rrow'd commented. "It's the last of the bison!" "He's poiple! Lookit! Poiplc!" "The bull of the woods!" "Howya like 'im, Fergus?" Killer Fergus posed behind the barrier and studied his specialty, an odd bull. Two stickers, Neel and #'omas, flourished capes to test the bull's charge, with Neel chanting, "Come on, bull! Come on, bull! Cotne on! Bull, bull, bull!" Moe did not charge. He moved, in a .sjx'culalive walk, toward the i hanting Ni cl who tantalized with the cape and retreated with shufMing steps. The charge, wiien it came, occurred almost too fast for sight. Neel wriggled on the horns, struck tljc sand, and the horns liftd him again. He smashed against the barrier. Tomas threw his cape over the bull's face. The left horn pinned the cape to Tomas's ned chest over the heart. Moe retired to the center of the ring and bellowed at the crowd, which, delirious from seeing human blood, applauded. Blood covered Moe's horns, dripped through the long hair on his neck, and trickled down between his eyes. Quavering helpers removed the bodies. The first lancer, livid and trembling, rode a blindfolded horse into the ring. "He'll fix this horse!" the crowd slavered. "We'll see guts this time!" Moe charged. The lancer backed his mount against the barrier and gripped his weapon, a stout pike. Sand sprayed like water as Moe swerved. On the left side of the horse, away from the menacing pike, Moe reared. The lancer left the saddle. A tangle of naked limbs thrashed across the wooden fence and thudded against the wall of the stands. Twenty-five thousand people held their breaths. The blindfolded horse wailed with dilated nostrils and every muscle vibrating in terror. Moe produced a long red tongue and licked the horse's jaw. Fergus dispersed the tableau. Red-haired, lean, and scarred with many past gorings, the popular killer stalked across the sand dragging his cape and roaring incomprehensible challenges. In the stands, the cheer leaders of the Fergus Fanclub lead a welcoming yell. "Yeaaaa, Fergus! Fergus! Fergus! Rah, rah, rah' Moe wandered through the helpers trying to distract him from the horse and looked at the killer. Fergus stamped his foot, shook the cape, and called, "Bull! Come on! Charge!" Moe completely circled the killer, who retired in disgust when another lancer rode into the ring. "Stick him good!" Fergus directed. The pike pointed at the great muscles of Moe's back, as the bull charged. Moe's head twisted in a blur of violence. Teeth clamped on the shaft behind the point. Too surprised to let go, the lancer followed his weapon from the saddle. He released his hold when Moe walked on him. Like some fantastic dog stealing a fresh bone, the bull trotted around the ring, tail high and pike in mouth. The crowd laughed. Wild-eyed men carried out the trampled lancer. A third, and extremely reluctant, lancer reined his horse through the gate. A pike in the mouth of a ton of beef utterly unnerved the man. He stood in the saddle and jumped over the barrier where a rain of rotten eggs from the booing fans spattered him thoroughly. A n uninjured bull pawed alone in the sand when the trumpet recording announced the end of the lancers period. The crowd noises softened to a buzz of speculation, questions, and comment, as the realization that weird events had been witnessed slowly penetrated that collective mind. The bull had not touched a horse, no pike had jabbed the bull, and five men had been killed or InGovemment!" a clear jured. "Great voice swore. "That ain't no bull, it's a monster!" Tliis opinion came from a sticker in Illard's team. Fergus attempted to persuade the man to help, since both of Fergus's stickers were dead. Part of the crowd agreed with lire stii ker's tluMight. for people began moving furtively to the exits with cautions glances at the animal in llu' ring. 'I'hcy, of course, could not know tiuit tin bull had been trained, with rul)herknew the first, and only, law of staying alive in the ring, "Charge the man and mt the cloth." The clouds that had obscured the sky all tlay formed darker masses tinted with pink to the east, and the black clot of a turkey buzzard wheeled soaring in the gloom. Carrying, in either hand, a barbed stick sparkling with plastic streamers, Fergus wnlkc'd into the ring. His assistants uiutiously flanked him with capes, Moe dropped the pike and charged in the ajiproved manner of a bull. Fergus raised the sticks high and brought them down on the humped back, although the back was not there. Tlie sticks dropped in the sand. As the killer leaped aside in the completion of a reflex action, a horn penetrated the seat of his trunks. The Fergus Fanclub screamed while their hero dangled in ignominy from the horn. Moe ignored tlae flapping, frantic capes. The killer gingerly gripped a horn in either hand and tried to lift himself off. Gently, Moe lowered his head and deposited the man beside an opening. Fergus scrabbled to safety like a rat to a hole. Four helpers with capes occupied the ring. When they saw death approaching on cloven hooves, two of them cleared the fence. The third received a horn beside his backbone and tumbled into the fourth. A dual scream, terrible enough to insure future nightmares, echoed above the screeching of the crowd. Moe tossed tlie bodies again and again across the bloody sand. Silence slithered over the Highland Bullring and over a scene reminiscent of the ring's bloody parent, tlie Roman Arena. Men sprawled gored, crushed, and dead across the sand. A section of the blood-specked barrier leaned splintered and cracked, almost touching the concrete wall. Unharmed, Fergus stood on one side of the battleground, Illard on the other. Fergus reached over the wooden fence for red flag and sword. Turning his back on the heaving Moe, who .stood but ten feet behind, the killer faced the quaking flesh that was Ringmaster Oswell, high up in the official box. The killer's voice shook, but the bitter satire came through the sound of departing boats and aircraft. Fergus said, 'T dedicate this bull to Ringmaster Oswell who has provided for us tliis great Dependence Day Bullfight in honor of the Great Government on which we all depend." He turned and faced the bull. Moe, for once, rushed the red flag, the only thing that made bullfights possible. His great shoulders presented a fair target for the sword. Fergus, perhaps the only bullfighter ever to be gored in the brain, died silently, lire sword raked a shallow gash long Moe's loin. In the sixth tier of the stand.s, saliva drooled from the slack mouth of the little man seated beside Stoneiypher. "Now's your chance. Illaid!" the man stjualled. "Be a hero! The last of the bullfighters! Kill him. Illard!" Illard walked on shaking legs over bodies he did not sec. He was short, fur a killer, and growing bald. I Ic picked up the sword Fergus had dropped, looked into the gory face of the bull, and toppled in the sticky sand. The sword quivered point-first beside his body. hei:es.sioal Highland Bullring. Riding the wind, blacker than the clouds, the over the rim of the stands with air whistling through the spatulnte feathers of rigid wings. The buzzard swooped a foot above Moe's horn.s and soared swiftly over the opposite side of the ring. That started the panic, although Moe's charge accentuated it. He crashed into the sagging section of the barrier. Cloven hooves scraped the wooden inclined plane, and Moc stopped with front feet in the first tier of the stands. He bellowed. The bull killed only one spectator, a man on whom he stejiped. The hundreds who died killed themselves or each other. They leaped from the towering rim of the ring, and they jammed the exits in writhing heaps. Moe's precarious stance slipped. Slowly, he slid back into the ring, where Ringmaster Oswell, quivering in a red toga, gestured from the darkness under the .stands, The fat man squeaked and waved. Moe's charge embodied the genuine fighting rage of a maddened bull. The scarlet door closed behind him. Stonecypher, with fists bloody and a heap of unconscious fearcrazed spectators piled before him, sat down. "Well. Moe," he whispered, 'T reckon you got even for a few of the bulls that's been tortured to death to atnuse a bunch of nuts. Maybe it wasn't the right way to do it. I don't know. If I'd only had the gun -- " Catriona turned a white mask of a face up to Stonecypher. "They killed him, in thenh?" "Sure. Bullfigluin' never was a sxrt. The bull can't win. If he's not killed in the ring, he's slaughtered under the stands." "You have nioah smart-bulls. Stony." The black copter came in with the sunset and hovered over the sand. The face of Duclmaster Smith peered out under his black tarn, while a hooded man, with pistols tattooed on his hand, aimed an automatic rifle. The duelniaster smiled at Stonecypher and cried, "You really should have waited until you were farther out in the Lake, before you dropped that little buzzer in e water." Fights of th Future fighting will probably bo done by high-flying automatic machines controlled from the ground by technicians. War vidims will be the unlucky ones on whom the bombs arc released, while the men who do the actual fighting will be comparatively safe. Powerful destructive bombs and intercepting missiles will chase each other at sx'ds, heals and heights that the liuinan body could never stand. Until recently, the speed of sound was considered mysterious and unbeatable. Today, our fighting planes can beat this speed in short spurts. And this i.s only the beginning. The National Advisory Coinmiltei for Aeixinau tics, in expcrinu-niing with designs for planes and miwiles of ilie furegions. This Ixjgins at five times the speed of sound. And at more than five miles up, where superplanes must fly. sound's sjK'cd comes to # miles per hour. The dangers at such sjirrds arc tremendous. But there will lxno reason for man to expose himself to these rigors. The machines that his skill and brains develop wilt do that for him. The danger of overheating is the principal barrier when planes and missiles are pushed through the air. At three times the speed of sound, the friction between the air and the surface of the plane produces a temperature of # degiees F. At five times sound, the temperature may reach # dcgrcc.s. This would melt most metals into a shapeless mass, kill the crew and destroy the equipment. This heat is created in the thin boundary layer of air around the aircraft. N'hile for short spurts of uliraspecd it will not soak into the craft, for sustained flight even te.st planes must be virtually flying refrigerators. Titanium and other such metals capable of beating the heat effect will be used to overcome this danger. There is even talk of constructing supersonic planes of a glass laminate made of fiber glass and held together by a suitable bonding resin, like polyester. The phenolics and melamines could also be used as bonding resins. From varied tests and uses, this type of glass appears able to w ithstand the searing skin friction temperature generated in uhra-high pecd flight much bettcT than most metals used in today's aircraft. From all indications, air fighting of (he future will probably be strictly impersonal. The machines themselves will be the pilots; the crew on the ground will merely start the machinery to working and guide them along their way. The wars in which our children and grandchildren will share will undoubtedly be infinitely more destructive, overwhelmini and farfetched than anything we can dream up in today's fiction. The Robot Whipping Boy may soon have an actual counterpart who will be used to perform the kinds of work that humans consider too dangerous -- such as clearing up radioactive debris, dismantling bombs, closing broken gas mains, etc. To operate this type of mechanism, it would be necessary to mount the robot on a vehicle radiocontrolled from a console set up a safe distance away. The radio-controlled arms will manipulate like human arms, while the operator will get a three-dimension view of the progress of the work through his binocular television camera. Thus, the mechanical hand responding to the action of the operator's hand will work almost with a sense of touch in handling the dangerous objects. As the operator's hand doses upon an object, the tnccbanical hands will do likewise, so that the oerator will feel the resistance imposed by the object that U being handled some distance away. Lost New World sea -- a depth of approximately five, and in some cases #, miles -- there exists an entire world of sea life. This was described in the reports of a recent deep sea expcditiHi made by a Danish naval vessel. Twenty-seven different varieties of sea life were dredged up from their black world where they live in close to freezing temperatures, and under pressures of about # poimds to the square inch. Included were all types of creatures similar to poljps and coal, all sedentary-type animals, but it is possible that larger and more active creatures such as a type of fish and squid also exist at these depths. Right now, however, it is impossible to do more than vaguely scratch the surface of this world, since we haven't developed the right tools for sea bottom research. What we have to work with now is still in a crude state. Scientists also found that the bottom of the sea was infested with bacteria which showed major differences in character from bacteria found on land or in surface waters. It's the last frontier on otir planet: the bottom of the sea. Watch Those Scales! old Roman bronze weighing instrument on exhibit in a Baltimore, Maryland, art museum, it would seem that the ancient Roman merchant didn't have as much of an opportunity to weight the scales as his modern counterparts do. According to the instrument exhibited, the Roman scale worked on the lever principle. There is a #-inch portable bronze rod which hangs by any one of tliree hooks, each on a different face of the rod. The item to be weighed is hung on hooks which are suspended from a chain at the end of the short arm of the lever. This idea is very similar to that used in certain types of scales in use ttxlay. Only a .single counterweight, however, was used in the old Roman scale to balance tin object bein weighed. Its operation was simple: all one did was slide the counterweight hark and forth along the graduated .scale on the long ann of the lever until it balanced. The weight could then be read from the scale. The entire instrument has three fares and three scales, each one exposed when the scale is hung by its corresponding hook. Voodoo Con Kill You! death" is more than just that. According to Ois. W. Proctor Harvey of Washington and Samuel A. Levine of Bosic'n, writing for the Journal of thf Amnican Medical Association, it is possible to be literally frightened to dcMlh. Although (Ic.itli from fright is rather rare, abnormal heartbeats caused by fright from a prolonged and highly irregular pattern which the doctors say could lead to ventricular nbrillalion. This is a situation where groups of heart muscles beat independently and without rhythm and the heart is unable to pump blood, thus resulting in death. Animal c-xperiments show' a nervous pathway from the hypothalamus -- tlic base of the brain -- to the heart. This -- to a nonnal person in a highly frightening emotional situation -- could cause types of ventricular irregularities which could result in death. The "voodoo" and "hexing" deaths of Africa and South America and Australia are not myths. They actually do occur. The emotion stress of the terrorized fear brought out by "voodoo" or "hexing" can cause death, but it would be a gradual process rather than a sudden one. Things We Never Knew Until Recently nr HE prehistoric buffalo,  according to bones recently unearthed in Texas, was almost twice as large as his modem progeny. The reason women are usually smaller than men is that the female -- or estrogenic -- hormone has a growth-suppressing action which is exerted through its stimulation of the adrenal gland to produce hormones similar to cortisone. These honnones depress the rate of energy production and have a powerful action in checking replacement of skin cells and suppressing growth in general. A cubic foot of atmosphere at times the amount of air of a cubic foot of atmosphere at an altitude of # miles. If laid edge to edge, the blood cells carried in the average adult human body would stretch I # miles. One ordinary' glass marble could make # miles of glass fiber. The energy in an average thunderstorm is equal to that dissipated by # A-bombs of the type dropped over Hiroshima. Norm Venners fancy was pretty well fixed on thoughts of electronic calculators -- until the invention started making passes at the inventor! Hninantic Inalape By W. W. Skupeldyckle Illustrated by Ed Enish M athematicians are just like people: old, young, fat, thin, male, female. This one was male, thirty-five, with steady brown eyes and a nice smile when he remembered to use it. His name was Norman Venner. and besides being a mathematical whiz generally, he had. designed and built an electronic brain, or calculator, which was in some ways smarter than himself -- and a lot less diffident. Electronic calculators are invariably given acronmic names such and nine out of ten of them are of the digital type. This is a nice way of saying that they count on their fingers. Thcre nearly as big as yats, and cost more, but can calany human. Norm's machine was of the analogue type, which is less flexible, less complex, and vastly smaller and cheaper. He called it the stood for "I Can Work 'Em All!" It could, loo! It was especially good at deriving equations from curves, which was really something. Charley Oglethorpe burst into the office one morning, catching Norm in a brown study. "Hi, Genius. How is she perking now?" "All right, except the pen skips a little sometimes and makes a messy curve." "Have to damp that arm better. When can I have her to work on?" "Soon a.s I finish these Mugu problems." Charley stared at him. "Mugu. Guided-missile center. It's nice busine.ss if we can get it -- the digitals are all booked up months ahead, and the particular type of problem they send us b right up our alley." "I thought you w'ere kidding me, like that Boolean Algebra stufT." "Wasn't kidding then, eitlicr." "I'll stick to instrument-making, thanks. You math guv's never have any fun." Norm shrugged, turned to the telephone, and called an CNtcnsion. "Hennosa." It was a rich, jlca.s ant voice. "Vic? IIow about the rest of the Mugu cards? Ready yet?" "I'll send diem up right away. Just finished them." "Who was tliat?" Charley inquired. "Vic Hermosa. Smart boy." Charley smiled a little. T here was a knock at the door. "Come in," Norm called. 'I'he door opened, and a small, neat girl entered. Her long bob was dark and silky, but windblown. She tossed her head and her hair settled into place, as if she had just brushed it. She extended a pack of punched cards. "Thank you," Nonn said, gravelyThe girl looked up at him suddenly, and he stepped back a little. She had sur#rising, dccp-violet eyes, and their glance seemed to hav-c a tangible impact. She nodded grave acknowledgment and left. "Damn it, I wish I could do that!" Norm complained. "Make goo-goo eyes?" "No. Shake my head so mv hair would automatically be combed like hers. I've been fighting this cowlick ever since I've been a kid -- stocking caps, gunk, the works. Still got it. And the part moves around and I have to hunt for it." "Know who she is?" "Nope. Clerk, mes.senger, I guess. They're always hiring new ones." "Doesn't she ever speak?" "Of course site -- come to think of it, I've never heard her. Must say it's a relief after the usual yackcty-yack. Haven't anytliing to talk to her about, anwav. She's just a child." "A pretty one, though." "Yes, she is." "You sure don't know anything about women. If anyone made eyes at me that way, I'd do something alxnu it." "What, for instance?" Norm inquired dryly. "Well, of course, I'm married. But I'd find out wlio she was, anyhow. Sometimes I think you're dead and don't know It." "Sometimes I agree with you." Norm said. He led one of the punch cards into the transmitter head, whii h fingered the holes and curve on the cur'c tracer. It would liave taken Norm or anyone else davs to arrive at the an.swer. "Sec? Skips here and tliere, but I can ink in the gaps." "Looks like the pen catches on the paper a little. I'll grind the point while I'm at it. Say, that thing really tliinks, doesn't it?" "In a way. Generally, the digitals have it all over the analogues when it comes to reasoning, but I built an extra brain into her." "Where?" "The 'Y' path. Remember? Tries several appropriate methods in suecession. I analyzed my own methods of attack, and built the same methods into her. She's an electronic except faster and more accurate." "I bet. She's more alive than you are.,Vhy don't you step out a little? First thing you know, you'll be getting old, and it'll be too late." "Leave the match-making to the women. I may be old, but I'm not an old fool. It's fall, not spring." "Yeah? All you need to be an old fool is just a little more time." took a card from his desk. It seemed to be an extra, not with the pack. He put it in the machine. The curve-tracer began to draw a rather abrupt curve, which meandered half across the sheet before Norm realized what it was. Suddenly, an image leaped to his mind's eye and he watched with fascination while the pen traced this roatheraatical' impossibility to the far end of the paper, and in obedience to several successive negative  factors in the problem retraced in the opposite direction a litde lower down. A head, a slightly lifted elbow, full rounded breast, a knee luxuriously drawn up, a dangling arm, all in one continuous line. There was nothing obvious about it; it was formalized, but with the individual style that is the artist's signature. Once seen, the image persisted. "Hey, Charley, look at this!" "Yeah. What about it?" "What about it! You ever see anything like it?" "Sure. It's a closed loop, like a hysteresis curve." "An hysteresis curve. But this isn't one. Look closely." "Of course, it has harmonics and variables in it. Might be one of those gas-discharge curves, if the gas tube happened to be defective. ' I've seen some funny..." "Look! It's a reclining figure, with the brad turned toward you -- sec? -- and the forearm over the head -- Breast, knee here, foot with the toe pointed, calf, thigh, and the near arm hanging. Remarkabie, once vou see it... "You're crazy. All I can see is a closed loop with some wrinkles in it." "Why, it's nearly as plain as a photograph! I can't understand..." "Plain, my eye! If that's the arm hanging down, and this the hand, where are the fingers? That 'hand' is just an oval. You got some imagination if you can get a reclining figure out of that." "Not a nude of the beer-garden type, I grant you. This is real art. Know what this means? Have you any idea how complex a formula must be to trace a curve like this? Just a plain hyperbola is bad enough. This is a test of the machine. Those Mugu boys have worked out this formula to see if she could break it down and draw the equivalent . curve, though I don't see how they did it. Even the larger digitals would find this a tough nut to crack, but our baby is a whiz at curves, see? I wonder how they justified the machinetime on it. Of course it is barely possible that they derived the equalion themselves, but it must have taken weeks if they did." "Maybe it took us tong as you say, but I still can't see any reclining figure in that curv'e. It's just a closed curve with some wiggles and bumps on it." "In anv case, I'm going to send this to Mugu right away. They'll want to know how long it took." "I wouidirt, if I were you." "Why not?" "Maybe trouble developed in the inaihine. Better run some more cards through it first. But right now I'm going home. We're having a roast tonight. Say, why don't you come to supper with us? Alice would hi' delighted -- she w'as just wondering what liappened to you. ril phone her... "No, no! I have to -- look, I got to find out what this means, vou sec? It isn't that -- explain it to Alice, will you? We need this cmtract, need all the work wc can get, you understand?" "Sure, sure. IIow about next week? OK? Well, see you in the morning." Charley left, grinning to himself as he closed the door behind him. li He was already puzzled perfectly on the next five c.ards, and kept her mind on her business. Meanwhile, Norm studied the first curve again. Funny Charley couldn't see it -- the figure was puzzling at first, until you got the idea, but then it was so clear. Or was it? Suddenly, he couldn't see it himself. He turned it upside down and sidewaN's; it was just a funny closed curve, having neither mathematical nor structural significance. Maybe he was going crazy! He threw the curve down on his desk and, soothed by the whirring of the tracer motor, fell into a brown .study. Suddenly, the image of the brunette with the violet eves appeared. No reclining nude, she; site shook her head in that habitual gesture and her long bob fell perfectly in place. She turned, with demurely downcast lashes and looked up at him with her violet eyes, and Norm came out of liis trance with a start. lie removed the last curTa sijnple hyjtrboUc curve, probably a problem in .atlcnuaiion or decay of some kind and put in the last pundi-card. 'Fhe machine started up immediately; the curv'e was elliptical. Then a vertical downstroke. retraced and with a gentle half-loop added. It was writing! P-r-o-p-i-n-q... What might this be? He watched, fascinated, as the letters continued. "Propinquity is the mother of love," it said, and stopped. llis trained mathematical logic gave him an immediate solution to the enigma : he was cracking up. It was utterly impossible to derive the equation to wTite "propinquity" in Spencerian script in less than a hundred man-hours, nor could a mathematical calculator be hired for so frivolous a purpose. It was fantastic, impossible; therefore, it w'as not so, and he wa.s either dreaming or crazy. Maybe lljinking about diat little brunette... Surely not; still, lie had been driving himself pretty hard. In the moming he would be fresh and alert. If it were a trick, he'd catch the trickster. And if it turned out to be a perfectly logical curve, he'd see a doctor. He left the curve in the niachine, closed the ventilator in the wail over his desk, and turned on the burglar alarm. I'his was nothing so crude as a loose board with a switch, but a quite elaborate electronic circuit that produced a field near the door. It wouldn't work on josts, but if any material body entered that field, it would trip the alarm and start a regular Mardi Gras. Security required by government contracts hardly demanded so much, but for n small plant it was sufficiently cheap, and Charley had had a lot of fun with it. Charley! Have to keep him out, too; and being its daddy, he'd know how to disable the aLirni. Of course, it would really be sufficient to tie a thread across the door which would break if anyone entered. He had no thread, but after a moment's thought, he pulled a three-cent stamp out of his bill-fold, and turned out the office-light. After glancing up and down the hall, he stuck the stamp on the door so that it would tear if the door opened. was still intact, and it was hard to see, even in broad daylight. The paper in the curve-tracer was perfectly blank, and there was no punch-card in the transmitter head. It might still be an elaborate joke, but the chances were small. He might be cracking up, or may have imagined the whole thing. The best thing to do would be to put it entirely out of his mind. He succeeded in this until mida "handsome devil." He jerked the punch-card out of the transmitter and called Vic. "Hermosa." That voice! It made chills run  up and down his backbone. A man had no right to a voice like that. "Vic? Bring up the calculations for the last batch of punch-cards, will you? I want to check something. The card numbers are F-#I through F-#." "Right away." Vic wasn't especially gabby. A good-looking young Latin, who knew as much math as most, they'd probably lose him to the draft any day now. Presently, someone knocked on the door. "Come in." It wasn't Vic; it was the girl. She laid the pack of problems and their attached work-sheets on the desk, shook her hair into place -- did she even have to comb it in the morning when she got up? -- looked him briefly in the eye, and turned to go. "How is Vic these days?" Norm inquired, whimsically. "Is he able to get about?" The girl smiled politely at this obvious badinage and left. He checked the problems against cards as he came to them. He knew the punch code well enough to do this in his head, since the kind of operation indicated was quite obvious. But the problems ended with F-#, and the "handsome devil" card was F-#. He got on the phone again. "Vic? What's your next card number?" "F-#." One expected a little guy to have a high voice; this one was quite deep, but soft. "Are the cards numbered very far ahead?" "We usually number a couple of dozen cards, and assign the numbers to the problems as they come in, from a scratch sheet." "Any of the cards been lost?" "Oh yes, on occasion. So far, we've recovered them all -- there are only two rooms where they could be. Up there or down here." Thai voice! How could a man have a voice like that? And why should he care if one did? Why even notice it? Instead of going to the cafeteria for lunch, he drove downtown and consulted the family doctor, who laughed at him. Reassured, he returned to the plant and got a sandwich and milk before going to his office. Old Doc Heffelbauer might be wrong, but he usually wasn't. Norm liked several men, but he didn't dream about any of them; if he was off his rocker, it was in some other manner. Visual delusions, for instance. The thing to do was to see Vic face to face. He called the office manager. "Henry? Send Vic Herinosa up there, will you? I want to talk to him." "Vic Hermosa? He's in the Army. Didn't you know?" "No, I didn't. Who is the guy that answers the phone in Aat fruity voice?" Henry lowered his voice. "Guy? That's Vic's sister Virginia. She took Vic's place when he left. Simplified the security investigation, and she's good, too. About as good as Vic, I'd say." "You mean to tell me a little girl like her cotild have a voice that deep?" "Startling, isn't it? Of course, it's actually a low contralto or tenor, but you expect her to be a lyric soprano. Shall I send her up to see you. "No, no. I want to think a bit first. Say, who interviewed her?" "Charley, I suppose. Just a formality, anyhow; the Hermosas and the Oglethorpes are neighbors, you know." teric phenomena in a sealed office! His very own calculating machine made calculated love to him; his best friend was evasive, and the i 'unior mathematician he thought le had been talking to every day for a couple of weeks was in the army. He might hammer away at all concerned until all the cards were accounted for, but that would disrupt office routine. Strategy, that was the thing! Be mighty peculiar if he couldn't break up this business, now that he had an idea what wa.s going on. But did he? Whoever punched the cards needed the proper equations derived first, and that called for a digital or an analogue combecause she was especially good at curves. Deriving them by the old methods was just too much horsework for any joke. And it didn't have to be a joke, either. The joke might be just the cover for a more sinister activity -- hash! If that were the case, why call attention to it with funny-businc#s? But what hurt was the girl's being mixed up in it. He could take a rib from Charley, for instance, but the girl was practically a stranger -- unfortuiutrly. Women could be cruel, as his inoihor had his mother's last year in the hospital and winced. She had sacrificed so much for him; and yet, wa.s it really l)etier to be a free bachelor than an old family man like Charley? 'Iheie wasn't anything the matter with Alice that he could see. Charley loved her; that was plain. Tortight should solve the thing, once and for all. Ih' left the plant, speaking to everyone he met as he usually did. Then he .sneaked back in, with the guard's help, and hid in his own olliuwith the lights out. His phone rang and he almost answered it before he remembered that he was supposed to be gone. The building wa.s hy rto means deserted; probably there was someone working overiinie in more than one department, though the main business, for tlie day was finished. After a bit, tin phone rang again, and he ignored it. Waiting was hard. He couldn't read, so he let his mind wander: what a romantic old thing she was! He needed a haircut; he'd have to get one tomorrow, before the hair grew down over his ears. What a voice that girl had -- and those eyes! Would they get further work from Mugu? How could they contact other Government agencies? good; would it be better to try to wanted them, or to keep the old girl busy and work problems for others? Eventually, the former, though for the time being it might be better to continue as they were until the old girl was well known. Under present conditions, that shouldn't take -- what was that hissing noise, a radiator? He listened closely. Hiss, hiss, hiss. No, it was a rubbing sound, with a scrape and an occasional hollow thump. Not loud, but close at hand. The ventilating system -- how obvious, now! He watched a white hand disengage the catches and carefully lower the grill to his desk. A small figure in white coveralls wormed its way out of the opening, landed on its hands on top of his de.sk, kicked feet clear and cartwheeled to the floor with disdainful ease. A head-shake settled a long bob in place; who could do that? Virginia Hermosa, and no one else! She couldn't see him against the shine of the window. She turned meanwhile fastening a large sheet of paper on the bed of the curvetracer with tape. She put a blank card in the punching head, opened the door of the patching-panel cabinet and rearranged the patchcords there. What a lab assistant she would make! Wasted in Set-up; anyone could punch cards, with a little practice. Well, not anyone, but any mathematician could. How thoroughly she knew this machine! no Charley must have told her, or her brother, plenty! With the curve-tracer runnin" at slow speed, she held the stylus steadily on the words she had written on the paper; the coordinates brain, she derived the horrible equations corresponding to the script, and obligingly translated these in turn to punchings on the card. So simple, when you saw It. But who would think of putting a burglar alarm on an air-duct? She could go all over the building through the walls if she chose. She was small enough to get through the ducts easily, though the vertical sections must be tough, even for so athletic a girl. The punching head stopped. Virginia restored everything to its original condition, stuck tlte card she had punched into a pile of them, folded the paper and stuffed it into her pocket, and turned to go. Norm put on the lights. ing the air with her hands to keep her balance. He held his hand out for the paper. "No!" she said, her voice shrill with excitement. Wordlessly, he closed in on her, and after a brief struggle pulled the paper out of her pocket. It said, simply, "I love you." Norm looked at Virginia, who turned her head away. "I can't appreciate the joke just now, though I realize it must be very funny. Charley will enjoy it. But what a lot of trouble. Suppose you had got stuck in the duct, then what? Is it worth the risk? And the violation of security is very serious." "I'm going to quit anyway," she muttered. So deep a voice for such a small girl! "Why did you do it?" "Well, it all started as a joke. Charley said you were shy, and -- and -- well..." "I see. Natural enough, I suppose. And you pretended to be your brother on the phone." "No, I never said I was Vic," she denied, quickly. He was handling this all wrong; he wasn't getting anywhere. All this was just talk, evasive talk. "Charley hired you?" "Yes. When Vic left for basic training." "I see. Charley's quite a joker, and it was hard to refuse him." "It was kind of a joke at first, but you're overlooking something: he's very fond of you. He really is! He brags all the time about how smart you are, and what a nice guy." "Charley's married, and he wants to see me married, too." "And you don't like girls?" "Listen, you made that drawing, loo, and all the other stuff?" 'es." An idea raised its pretty head. "Listen, I've decided to be very angry about this. You've made a fool of me, and I'm not going to let you get away with it. Now, I know a place that's quiet, and has very good steaks; I'm going to t.ake you to supper and bawl you out. Better get into .street-clothes, and don't take all night." "Sorry, I couldn't possibly. Some other time, perhaps.' "Tonight. Now. Get going." "No. I have a date," "Break itl" "No! You may be my boss, and I may be a forward hussy, but tonight I'm going home, and you cant stop me!" How silly could you get? Suddenly he understood the way of a man with a maidj love was older than conversation, and they both saw and understood through and beyond any silly words. In fact, the silUer the words, the better! "That's what you think! You're going with me, or you're going to jail. They'll put you in a dark cell with the rats. They have their own specially-bred rats, you know." He leered, slyly. "You wouldn't dare!" He shrugged, elaborately, and turned to the phone. She darted past him to the door and he caught her, pulled her back out of the hall. She was surpriangly strong and determined, and she ducked when he kissed her. "That one was a mess, wasn't it?" he complained. She relaxed and began to laugh, and he joined her. She looked into his eyes a long moment, and pulled his head down, kissed him tenderly. "You don't give a girl much choice -- one big rat or a lot of little ones." "I'll give you no choice at all. I'll teach you to play tricks on me! Hurry up and change." "One of the girls keeps a semiformal in her locker. I can borrow  it and we could go dancing." "I don't dance. Never learned. Couldn't we just talk?" "We could, but we won't; you'll never learn any younger. You seem light enough on your feet Come on, it'll be fun!" "Tonight I can do anything! You take too long to change, and I'll tear the buildiilg down brick by brick with my bare hands, hear me?" "No, please don't! I'll hurry, I promise!" He waited impatiently at the door of the locker room. Now that he knew how to talk to a girl, he wanted to talk, and talk, and talk some more. He planned extravagant things to say when she came out, but when she appeared, smiling, he was struck dumb. She took his arm and they half ran, half skipped out of the building to his car. and for those reading IF for the first time who want to catch up on the good stories they've missed, we have managed to obtain a I limited number of copies of all earlier issues. There available at #c ehch, from the Circidation Dept., Qtiinn Publishing Co., Kingston, N. Y. If this story has a moral, it is: dont shoot too soon, or you may never know what you hit! By Leslie Perri tllustrated by Dick Rockwell  through the topmost branches the inky surface of a cold spring, of the tall trees in a silent, autumBehind an interlacing of nakedlynal forestDry leaves trembled nerwhite birches a young deer stoc vously as the dark tree trunks still with wide lacquered eyes fixed stirred in a thrust of the wind. A on him. Its tar-black nostrils shone in a quivering of fright and then like the wind it rustled momentarily on the forest floor of crackling leaves and disappeared. He breathed heavily with disappointment. He had transmitted fear, his own apprehensions, again. He moved from the protection of an overhanging rock. The ease with which he moved delighted him sensuously. This sportive exhilaration had to be curbed ; it made him less sensitive to the problem at hand. He had to communicate. There were obviously lower orders, mainly the winged beings, Some were tiny and fragile. They would approach and light on him with the unwarincss of the naive, trusting to their speed to escape from danger. From them he had no consciousness of intelligence. They buzzed and swarmed and hummed with monotonous idiocy. The larger winged beings were more interesting but they wore the drabness of the forest on their sleek wings. They would not come close but made inquiring sounds and swooped away at his approach. He had learned to move silently through the silent forest. He felt almost weightless and inflnitely agile and this delight he had to renounce for the time. He could walk erect, or run with incredible rapidity. And when he stood erect his body attained a new vitality and with his head above the lower woody vegetable growths he experienced a new dignity and regality. He was no petitioning refugee from the pitiless vise of unending cold. Here in this autumnal forest was the warmth and promise of spring, for him. Excitement made him warmer and more jubilant still. He had to communicate. But with whom? With which of these beings could he share his unbelievable adventure? He ran down a sloping floor of the forest and ran and ran, slipping and sliding on the leaves until he was breathless. And came to halt in a marshy spot with the spikes of dried vegetation towering about him. His heart beat with transcendental joy. He ached to babble of his happiness and then to relive his adventure in the telling of it to another intelligence the equal of his. He breathed more slowly and more slowly yet. Above the trees, caught in the web of branches, a gin cloud forms of purest white drifted slowly above the trap of the forest. And there, lower than the clouds, was the magnificence of a golden shadow wanned the tree trunks, the faces of the dry leaves, the soft, sucking black earth of the marsh and -- him. In this warmth he luxuriated, with every sensibility in his being. His body had starved for warmth. And while he stood thus, a long slithering form passed before him, describing in its movement across the moss and rocks and black leafmoulded earth resilient, graceful curves. It passed him without notice, conveying nothing, an impenetrable life form. And then, as suddenly, his muscles tightened and he withdrew reluctantly from the warmth of the sun. dried, tassel-topped grasses, feeling the scrape of sharp seedbearing burrs as they clung to him. In a closely woven burrow, hidden from the sun and the reach of the wind, he heard a new sound, a louder, sharper crackle in the forest. A new scent crowded into the burrow and overpowered him with a new sensation, a suffocating awareness of danger. He was cold again, and taut. The shadow from which he had escaped enclosed him again. This same deadly shadow of fear sapped his new vitality and destroyed his sensuous joy. There was tliat sharper sound, a baying shrillness that resounded through the forest quiet and hammered at the tree trunks and unresisting vegetation with an unreasoning in.sistencc. The echo of this new, insane voice of danger stirred him. He moved cautiously and quickly from the burrow and through the marsh. He was not erect now, but low and rapid-moving. He thought desperately of sun-ival now, not communication. Tliis howling, yapping being had found him out, scented him in the forest and he knew only that he had to escape. TTie forest floor rose gradually to greater and greater heights. He recognized the terrain and tlie character of this part of the forest. There was, at the summit, a sudden drop down a face of Irregular outcroppings of stone. And at the base of this lay a vast body of w'ater in which he could hide. He could manage the tall face of stone, hiding and blending into its cold greyness. The baying and yapping was closer and he moved even more rapidly. The chase seemed directed to him, not purpfoselcss. Behind the baying and shrill crying of this hunter was yet another will. And this chilled him with hopeless horror. He felt instinctively that he could communicate with this will, that this wa.s the intelligence he sought. But between it and him was this unleashed agent for his destruction. He ran more quickly and with a new sensation of weariness as the slope mounted. The vegetation was green here, and somewhat sparser. There were fewer places of refuge. At times he ran without the protection of any covering, only the moss and green ground vines underfoot. As he reached the summit he hc.'ird a new sound, a sharp undecipherable crack and whine overhead. When he had reached the top of the sharp rise, he stood erect for a moment, seeking the surest path for his descent of the sharp rock face. The body of water below gleamed wan#ily blue. The sun was a glorious, almost perfectly round entity, low in the sky. His body .straightened involuntarily, rose up in the warmth of the sun, darkly and strangely outlined against the unbroken blue of the sky. And then as the crack and whine of the gun sounded in the evening quiet, not once but twice, and inexpertly a third time, lus shape crumbled against the sky and he toppled from the clilT edge into the still blue of the lake below. The man breathed heavily as he came up the hill. He was redfaced from exertion and frustration. He was heavy and clumsy in the perfection Abercrombie and Fitch had tailored into his hunting clothes. He held his rifle, an expensive and aesthetically beautiful instrument of destruction, like a blunt, ugly club. He stood at the edge of the clUT and looked down. There was nothing. Only the serenity of the early evening, the unanswering quiet of the lake, the ridge of mountains, the darkening sky. "Now what in the hell was that?" the man muttered. The dog, beside him, shivered and sat down suddenly. Its howl was unbidden, imdirected, and it filled the forest with unrest metal some fifty feet in diaminstantaneously, and even the eter, it rests on stubby, retractelecto-magnctic waves that ablelegs beside the buildings of carry power travel at up to the port center. Carriers speed # miles per second... to and fro from refrigerated This is a quotation from warehouses, carrying cargo to "The Sky's No Limit," an artithe conveyer lift built into the cle in the March # issue of ship's base. The Sooner Magazine which "The load consists of #is published by the University odd men and women, each of Oklahoma Association. It frozen solid in a coffin-like was written by Dwight V. block of chemical ice. Living Swain, old-time science fiction organic matter is the one thing writer and instructor in jourthe duplicator units can't repronalism at that school. Mr. duce ... Swain sneers at rockets but says "Now the last of the icewe'll have space travel by #; blocks is aboard, the dozen-odd the key inventions will be a crewmen at their stations, the "wireless power transmitter," a hatches sealed. The sphere "contragravitational device," floats for a moment, barely off and a "transmutational duplithe ground, while the stubby cator" -- this last being an amstabilizing legs retract. Then, swer to all problems of supply, slowly at first (in order to Far-fetched? Maybe. But avoid the heat of atmospheric though we're betting on rockets, friction) it soars into the sky. Mr. Swain just might have No one knows for sure how fast something there. (Continued from page #) done to do it in another way. RuizSanchez raised his hand. Immediately Chtexa walked toward the ship. "I wish you a good journey," the Lithian said, "wherever you may go. I wish also that your road may lead back to this world at some future time. I have brought you the gift that I sought before to give you, if the moment is appropriate." Cleaver had straightened up and wa.s now glaring suspiciously at the Lithian. Since he did not understand the language, he was unable to find anything to which he could object; he simply stood and radiated unvvelcomcness. "Thank you," Ruiz-Sanchez said. This creature of Satan made him miserable, made him feel intolerably in the wrong. How could Chtexa know -- ? T he lithian was holding out to him a small vase, scaled at the top and provid("d with two gently looping handles. The gleaming porcelain of which it had been made still carried inside it, under the glaze, the fire which had formed it; it was iride.scent, alive with long quivering festoons and plumes of rainbows, and the form as a whole would have made any potter of Greece abandon his trade in shame. It was so beautiful that one could imagine no use for it at all. Certainly one could not fill it with left-over beets and put it in the refrigerator. Besides, it would take up too much space. "This is my gift," Chtexa said. "It is the finest container yet to come from Xorcdeshch Gton; the material of which it is made contains traces of every element to be found on Liihia, even including iron, and thus, as you see, it shows the colors of every shade of emotion and of thought. On Eartli, it will tell Earthmen much of Lithia." "We will be unable to analyze it," Ruiz-Sanchez said. "It Is too perfect to destroy, too perfect even to open." "Ah, but we wish you to open it," Chte.xa said. "For it contains our other gift." "Another gift?" "Yes, a more important one. A fertilized, living egg of our species. T;ike it with you. By the time you rcaih Earth, it will be ready to hatch, and to grow up with you in your strange and marvelous W'orld. The container is the gift of all of us; but the child inside is my gift, for it is ray child." Ruiz-Sanchez took the vase in trembling hands, as tliough he expected it to explode. It shook with subdued flame in his grip. "Goodbye," Clitexa said. He turned and walked away, back toward the entrance to the path. Cleaver watched him go, .shading his eyes, "Now what was that all about?" the physicist said. "The Snake couldn't have made a bigger thing of it if he'd been handing you his own head on a platter. And all the dme it was only a pot!" Rulz-Sanchcz did not answer. He could not have spoken even to himself. He turned away and began to ascend the cleats, cradling the vase carefully under one elbow. While he was still climbing, a shadow passed rapidly over the hull -- Cleaver's last crate, being borne aloft into the hold by a crane. Then he was in the airlock, with the rising whine of the ship's generators around him. A long shaft of light from outside was cast ahead of him, picking out his shadow on the deck. After a moment, a second shadow overlaid his own: Cleaver's. Then the light dimmed and went out. The airlock door slammed. (Continuid from pagt #) A Red Cross ship landed, its ports grating open. Dollies shuttled across to it, loading injured men. Two relief workers appeared. They opened the door to Hull's car, getting in the back. 'Drive us to town." They sank down, exhausted. "We got to get more help. Hurry it." "Sure." Hull started the car again, gained speed. "How did it happen?" Julia asked one of the grim-faced exhausted men, who dabbed automatically at the cuts on liis face and neck. "Earthquake." "But why? Didn't they build it so -- " "Big quake." The man shook his head wearily. "Nobody expected. Total loss. Thousands of cars. Tens of thousands of people." The other worker grunted. "An act of God." Hull stiffened suddenly. His eye.i flickered. "What is it?" Julia asked him. "Notlung." "Are you sure? Is something wrong?" Hull said nothing. He was deep in thought, his face a mask of startled, growing horror. Dear Sir : Your issue of March, #, contained an article entitled "Galileo the Persecuted." That Galileo was persecuted is true, but as to why he was perf?ecuted your author seems to be mistaken. #. It was not heresy to teach the Copemican theory. #. The question revolves around, not the subject matter of his teaching, but how he taught it. In the st place the work of Copernicus, "De Revolutionibus Orbium Caelestium," which was published many years before Galileo, owed its publication to the financial support of two Catholic Cardinals and was dedicated to Wstorical fact. Would a Pope -- any Pope -- allow a heretical work to be dedicated to him? Second, Galileo taught the Copemican theory as an established fact, not a theory. Newton (#) proved the theory, not Galileo. One other point: Galileo, in supporting his theory, rejected the tradidonal interpretation of some of the texts of the Bible. For this he was pimished, not for trying to advance science or for being so intellectually in advance of his time. Every issue has two sides ; maybe the author would like to investigate my side. Let him review Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa (#), Canon Copernicus (#), and an article on this subject by Hilaire Belloc in "Difficulties," published #, London, by Eyre and Spottiswoode. -- Thomas F. Hardacre # Myrtle St. Lawrence, Mass; Dear Editor: I dislike writing letters of praise, but I am of the opinion that one is in order for the March issue. I read a lot of science fiction: good, bad, indifferent, and sometimes -- stinking. I usually write of the stinking issues of magazines, so it pains me deeply to write a letter such as this. Ivar Jorgenson's Deadly City was better than good, and likewise for Kenneth O'Hara's Thy Name is Woman. The overall effect which everyone I know got from the lastmentioned story is the one I believe the author intended : a good "sick" feeling. There are three other stories in the March issue which I consider outstanding: Bryce Walton's The Victor (although I cannot conceive of any victory, other than death, being possible; overthrow of "the system" being impossible), Frank Quattrochi's The Sword (well-written, with no weaknesses in plotting), and Waldo T. Boyd's The Salesman, a neat, well-written bit of subtle humor so rare in science-fiction. I'd like to conpliment your art editor, Ed Valigursky, for his fine choico of story illustrations. The cover-picture, and the two blackand-white pictures inside, are excellent and in the best taste. Your magaaine make-up, by the way, was discussed in the Department of Journalism (rf the University of Houston as an outstanding example of good make-up. # Schley St. Houston #, Texas Gentlemen : I should first like to compliment you on the breadth and conceptual design of the inside cover drawings in the March issue of IF. However, to be a bit technical; granting that the invader rocket would have wings and control surfaces for navigation in an atmosphere, and granting further the air intakes since the craft might on occasion change over to jet operation -- it is not conceivle that the homing missiles would have airfoils of any nature. Since the missiles are obviously designed for operation on and around an airless world, airfoils as lifting or control surfaces would be totally useless and superfluous. If guidance ir to be achieved, reaction vanes in the exhaust stream or rocket steering nozzles must be employed. But the drawings are lovely. -- J. R. Schoenbaum Chief Engineer, Airlectron Inc. P. O. Box #, Caldwell, N. J. Gentlemen: Curiosity impels an inquiry about my story in the March # issue of IF. Why did you change the name? I am not refering to the name of the story, for in all justice I have is a better title than the one I submitted. I mean why did you change the name of the author? Does Deeming have a nicer ring to it than Deming? -- Richard Deming # Central Ave. Dunkirk, N. Y. Well, yes, since you ask. But we do apologize. Dear Sir: I would like to make a suggestion, hoping you will be able to adopt it. Cotild you persuade the author Kenneth O'Hara to write a sequel to his "Thy Name is Woman"? The possibilities for such a story are many. The theme of that novelette, as you know from recent newspapers, is not so extraordinary, but the build up could be made so. I do sincerely.hope that this suggestiem can be worked, and believe me I shall await each edition. -- John H. Hayes # Main St. Bethel, Conn. lts safe to say Kenneth O'Hara will appear in these pages again, though any sequel must be at least as good as the original to be accepted, and that isn't always easy. As for the timing of "Thy Name is Woman," it was sheer coincidence; science is catching up with all kinds of science fiction! Dear Sir: I like Ed Valigursky's illustrations but how in the hell can his spaceships land? -- B('rt McDougle Belpre, Ohio The inude covers of this issue show (a) a spaceship landing and (b) a spaceship landed. Any other questions? Dear Mr. Quinn: I should like to congratulate you. On what? On not being stampeded in a blind panic, into making a horrid thing out of your mag, but instead, hewing to the line and using discretion and discrimination and excellence as criteria for selecting the stories you print. What do I mean by "thing"? Well, it's that nauseous combination: big-name, spillane-lonnigan, yellow-joumal-hollyw'ood thing that so many editors seem to think they have to have or go on the rocks, heck knows why. Please stay like you are, huh? Don't catch that squirrelly virus. If you stay like you are you'll be thriving when the rest are just a memory in the Congressional Library files. Say, if you're not careful, you're liable to become the best mag. And that's some statement, from a fan who has been firmly loyal to Astounding, since volume one number one! # East #th St. Mishawaka, Ind. Thank you. Phyla. We're blushing slightly, but you summed up our present and future editorial policy so well ive couldn't resist printing your Utter. Gentlemen : Willy Ley ha.s accepted our invitation to be the guest of honor and principal speaker at the I #th World Science Fiction Convention, which will be held at the Bellevue Stratford Hotel in Philadelphia over the Labor Day weekend this year. Willy's scientific accomplishments are many and varied, and his talks are always delightfully entertaining, so this is sure to be a worthwhile event for fans and readers. Willy's talk will climax an exceptionally interesting program; we've made a special effort to surpass last year's Chicago convention and think we've succeeded, though it wasn't easy. Memberships or further information may be obtained by writing Box #, Philadelphia #, Pennsylvania. -- Milton A. Rothman the plonet in fact! The sotellite is believed to have an atmosphe'e, and it is else probable that water in o pcrpetuolly trorer stote iS present The man m the foreground obeve is compiling data, wnile the other two gozc at the cloud-cove red planet end its unique rings. Dfowing by Ed Voltgursky'  j ) i J rhftjt I "   exploration tour of the other members of rhe Solor fam ly. Though still at a distance of sevcrcl thousand miles t has just started its engines to swerve into its braking orbit around the planet. Far "below," it is daylight over Asia and the South Pacific. All Stories New and Complete Cover by Ken Fagg: Surveying a Dying Sun by Arthur Dekker Savage IF is published bi-monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc. Volume #, No. #. a yright # by Quinn Publishing Co., Inc. Office ol publication, # Lord Street, alo. New York. Entered as Second Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New York. Subscription S#. # for # issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada # for # issues; elsewhere # Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine arc fiction; any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. Not responsible for unsolicited artwork or manuscripts. #c a copy. Printed in U.S.A. Next issue on sale November #th between science fiction and automobiles. Crank up a fantasy fan and in a lot of cases he'll rattle on all afternoon about Maseratis, multiple carburetors, Jaguars, torsion bars, Gordinis, rear engines, horsepower-weight ratios, Ferraris, the Le Mans race, chopping and channeling, Porschcs, acceleration figures, economy figures, Bugattis, fiberglass bodies and the question of steam power. Why? I don't quite know, but I've studied enough case histories to be sure of my ground. Love of speculative fiction and love of automobiles as something more than just basic transportation somehow go together -- two hearts pierced by a single chrome-plated arrow. Writing on classic cars in True's Automobile Yearbook some time ago, Eugene Jaderquist mentioned that the car collector's other hobbies are almost invariably "music and science fiction." He gave no further explanation. This may have been because he had a hard enough time defining what a classic car is, and why one large, old luxurious vehicle is a classic while another isn't. Classic fans are real fanatics; they aren't even remotely interested in any other kind of car! For those in the audience who think an automobile is just a way of getting from one place to another (actually it is at least a fine form of entertainment and sport, and in some cases a complete way of life), I'll demolish one obvious answer. The thrill of traveling at high speeds has nothing to do with it. Concepts of vast size are much more typical of science fiction than concepts of high speed (fascination with the idea of getting from place to place virtually instantaneously strikes me as a slightly different horse). And a great many auto fans are much more interested in a car's size, shape, inner mechanisms andor rarity than what it will do when the throttle is floorboarded. It doesn't seem to be the hot rodders who are stf bugs. It would be closer to the truth to say that the people in question stem from the ranks of the mechanically inclined with a hunger for things unique. But I'm not sure that's the whole story. rocketeers may have the opportunity to satisfy both tastes at once, if a fellow named Richard Arbib has his way. This gentleman is well known in the auto industry for his startling designs, which sometimes turn into real cars as in the case of the Packard Pan-American. And in his regular column in a recent issue of a new magazine tersely called Cars, he said: "The effect of unveiling the mysteries of deep outer space, the contemplation of travel at the speed of light and perhaps even a step into another dimension, should be the most vibrant inspiration to car designers today." Arbib went on to tell how he asked his students at Pratt Institute, Brooklyn, to design vehicles from other worlds. I admit that when he said the instructions demanded that these "semi-abstract" vehicles "express weird, exciting new forms," the pleasure I'd felt at first thought of the project began to diminish slightly. On top of that, he insisted that "the designer... must learn to use the black shadows of the moon to advantage," without a hint of how this was to be done. Maybe he meant that cars should be made of dark-green cheese -- but I sometimes suspect that Detroit is doing that already. On the subject of applying features of these other-world vehicles to today's automotive styling problems, however, Arbib relieved my fears a bit. "The problem amounts to far more than including a few weird shapes of conical nature or tacking on sweeping appendages to form what appear to be shark-like mutations." There was more in the same comparatively realistic vein. Then : "The transparent bubbles of today's jet plane canopies were found long ago in the rocket ship stories. Hand controls have given way to pushbutton controls so, in projecting design, it's logical for pushbutton controls to give way to mind controls." Goody! I've always wanted a "space car," as Arbib kept referring to his futuristic jalopy, with mind controls. It would allow no-armed driving, for one thing -- an idea that has infinite possibilities. Better, it would give the poor backseat driver an even break; she -- it's usually a she -- could put her mind to work too and perhaps even succeed in making the family spacer go in two directions at once. And if those mind controls were sensitive enough, the lucky, liberated driver could at last sit comfortably at home with a long cool drink and let the car take its usual Sunday afternoon tour of the # mile-an-hour superhighways with nobody in it. Arbib boiled it down to this: "This does not mean that all space cars must look like rocket ships on wheels. As a matter of fact, wheels might be the first thing to go!" Me? Well, Maude, my old Chevrolet, will have to last me for a while yet. But I have several projects in mind. The one I cherish most fondly involves buying a little German Volkswagen -- one of the most functional cars ever built, with a jewel of an air-cooled engine in the rear, but also one of the ugliest. I figure the original body would be easy to remove and would make an ideal doghouse. And with a simple aerodynamic body of fiberglass or something equally light replacing the old one, that baby would go! What are you driving? -- Its Remember the story of the last man on Earth who heard a knock on his door? Fiyatil was in the same position, with the difference that he had chosen it deliberately. And when the "knock" -- an alarm bell -- came, that was different too... Illustrated by Kelly Freas M AY #, # -- Well, I did it! It was close, but fortunately I have a very suspicious nature. My triumph, my fulfillment was almost stolen from me, but I was too clever for them. As a result. I am happy to note in this, my will and testament, I nov r begin my last year of life. No, let me be accurate. This last year of life, the year that I will spend in an open tomb, really began at noon today. Then, in the second sub-basement of the Museum of Modern Astronautics, I charged a dial for the third successive time and got a completely negative response. That meant that I, Fiyatil, was the only human alive on Earth. What a struggle I have had to achieve that distinction! Well, it's all over now, I'm fairly certain. Just to be on the safe side, I'll come down and check the anthropometcr every day or so for the next week, but I don't think there's a chance in the universe that I'll get a positive reading. I've had my last, absolutely my final and ultimate battle with the forces of righteousness -- and I've won. Left in secure, undisputed possession of my coffin, there's nothing for me to do now but enjoy myself. And that shouldn't be too hard. After all, I've been planning the pleasures for years! Still, as I tugged off my suit of into the sunlight, I couldn't help thinking of the others. Gruzcman. Prejaut and possibly even Mo-Diki. They'd have been here with me now if only they'd had a shade less academic fervor, a touch more of intelligent realism. Too bad in a way. And yet it makes my vigil more solemn, more glorious. As I sat down on the marble bench between Rozinski's heroic statues of the Spaceman and Spacewoman, I shrugged and dismissed the memories of Gruzeman, Perjaut and Mo-Diki. They had failed. I hadn't. I leaned back, relaxing for the first time in more than a month. My eyes swept over the immense bronze figures towering above me, two pieces of sculpture yearning agonizingly for the stars, and I burst into a chuckle. The absolute incongruity of my hiding place hit me for the first time -- imagine, the Museum of Modern Astronautics! Multiplied by the incredible nervous tension, the knuckle-biting fear of the past five days, the chuckle bounced up and down in my throat and became a giggle, then a splutter and finally a reverberating, chestheaving laugh that I couldn't stop. It brought all the deer out of the museum park to stand in front of the marble bench where Fiyatil, the last man on Earth, choked and coughed and wheezed and cackled at his senile accomplishment. I don't know how long the fit might have held me, but a cloud, merely in the course of its regular duties as a summer cloud, happened to slide in front of the sun. That did it. I stopped laughing, as if a connection had been cut, and glanced upward. The cloud went on, and the sunlight poured down as warmly as ever, but I shivered a bit. Two pregnant young does came a little closer and stood watching as I massaged my neck. Laughter had given it a crick. "Well, my dears," I said, tossing them a quotation from one of my favorite religions, "it would seem that in the midst of life we are at last truly in death." They munched at me impassivelyM AY #, # -- I have spent the last two days putting myself and my supplies in order and making plans for the immediate future. Spending a lifetime in sober preparation for the duties of custodianship is one thing. Finding suddenly that you have become the custodian, the last of your sect as well as your race -- and yet, peculiarly, the fulfillment of them both -- that is quite another thing. I find myself burning with an insane pride. And a moment later. I turn cold with the incredible, the majestic responsibility that I face. Food will be no problem. In the commissary of this one institution, there are enough packaged meals to keep a man like myself well-fed for ten years, let alone twelve months. And wherever I go on the planet, from the Museum of Buddhist Antiquities in Tibet to the Panorama of Political History in Sevastopol, I will find a similar plenty. Of course, packaged meals are packaged meals: somebody else's idea of what my menu should be. Now that the last Affirmer has gone, taking with him his confounded austerity, there is no longer any need for me to be a hypocrite. I can at last indulge my taste for luxury and bathe my tongue in gustatory baubles. Unfortunately I grew to manhood under Affirmer dominion and the hypocricies I learned to practice in sixty cringing years have merged with the essential substance of my character. I doubt, therefore, that I will be preparing any meals ol fresh tood from the ancient recipes. And then too, meals of fresh food would involve the death of creatures that arc currently alive and enjoying themselves. This seems a bit silly under the circumstances... Nor did I need to put any of the automatic laundries into operation. Yet I have. Why clean my clothes, I asked myself, when I can discard a tunic the moment it becomes slightly soiled and step into a newly manufactured garment, still stifT in memory of the machine matrix whence it came? Habit told me why I couldn't. Custodian concepts make it impossible for me to do what an Affirmer in my position would find easiest: shrug out of the tunic on a clear patch of ground and leave it lying behind me like a huge, brightly colored dropping. On the other hand, much Affirmer teaching that my conscious mind has been steadfastly rejecting for decades, I find to my great annoyance, has seeped into the unconscious osmoticallv. The idea of deliberately destroying anything as functional, if relatively unesthetic, as a dirty Tunic, Male, Warm-Season, Affirmer Ship-Classification No. #, appalls me -- even against my will. Over and over again, I tell myself that Affirmer Ship-Classification Numbers now mean nothing to me. Less than nothing. They are as meaningless as cargo symbols on the Ark to the stevedores who loaded it, the day after Noah sailed. Yet I step into a onc-seatcr flyball for a relaxing tour of the museum grounds and something in my mind says: No. #. I close my teeth upon a forkful of well-seasoned Luncheon Protein Component and note that I am chewing Ship-Classification Numbers # through #. I even remind myself that it is a category to be brought aboard among the last, and only when the shipboard representative of the Ministry of Survival and Preservation has surrendered his command to the shipboard representative of the Ministry of The Journey. Not a single Affirmer walks the Earth at the moment. Together with their confounded multiplicity of government bureaus -- including the one in which all people professing Custodianism had to be registered, the Ministry of Antiquities and Useless Relics -- they are now scattered among a hundred or so plantctary systems in the galaxy. But all this seems to matter not a bit to my idiotically retentive mind which goes on quoting texts memorized decades ago for Survival Placement Examinations long since superseded and forgotten by those in authority. They are so efficient, the Affirmers, so horribly, successfully efficient! As a youngster, I confided to my unfortunately loquacious comrade, Ru-Sat, that I had begun creative painting on canvas in my leisure hours. Immediately, my parents, in collaboration with my recreational adviser, had me volunteered into the local Children's Extra Work for Extra Survival Group, where I was assigned to painting numbers and symbols on packing cases. "Not pleasure but persistence, persistence, persistence will preserve the race of Man," I had to repeat from the Affirmer catechism before I was allowed to sit down to any meal from that time on. Later, of course, I was old enough to register as a conscientious Custodian. "Please," my father choked at me when I told him, "don't come around any more. Don't bother us. I'm speaking for the entire family, Fiyatil, including your uncles on your mother's side. You've decided to become a dead man: that's your business now. Just forget you ever had parents and relatives -- and let us forget we had a son." This meant I could free myself from Survival chores by undertaking twice as much work with the microfilm teams that traveled from museum to museum and archeological site to skyscraper city. But still there were the periodic Survival Placement Exams which everyone agreed didn't apply to Custodians but insisted we take as a gesture of good will to the society which was allowing us to follow our consciences. Exams which necessitated putting aside a volume entitled Religious Design and Decoration in Temples of the Upper Nile for the dreary, dingy, well-thumbed ShipClassification Manual and Uniform Cargo Stowage Guide. I had given up the hope of being an artist myself, but those ugly little decimals took up time that I wished to spend contemplating the work of men who had lived in less fanatic and less frenzied centuries. They still do! So powerful is habit that now that I have no questions on dehydration to answer ever again, I still find myself doing the logarithmic work necessary to finding out where a substance is packed once its water is removed. It is horribly frutrating to be mired after all in an educational system from which I turned completely away! involved in at the moment probably don't help very much. Yet it is very important for me to pick up enough information from the elementary educatories in this museum, for example, to insure my not having to worry about the possibility of a flyball breakdown over a jungle area. I'm no technician, no trouble-shooter. I have to learn instead how to choose equipment in good working order and how to start operating it without doing any damage to delicate components. This technological involvement irritates me. Outside, the abandoned art of # years beckons -- and here I sit, memorizing dull facts about the power plants of worker robots, scrutinizing blueprints of the flyballs' antigrav screws, and acting for all the world like an Affirmer captain trying to win a commendation from the Ministry of The Journey before he blasts off. Yet it is precisely this attitude that is responsible for my being here now, instead of sitting disconsolately aboard the Affirmer scout ship with Mo-Diki, Gruzeman and Prejaut. While they exulted in their freedom and charged about the planet like creaky old colts, I made for the Museum of Modern Astronautics and learned how to operate and read an anthropometer blue. I hated to waste the time, hut I couldn't forget how significant to an Affirmer, especially a modern one, is the concept of the sacredncss of human life. They had betrayed us once; they were bound to come back to make certain that the betrayal left no loose ends in the form of Custodians enjoying fulfillment. I was right then, and I know I am right now -- but I get so bored with the merely useful! Speaking of the anthropometer, I had a nasty shock two hours ago. The alarm went of! -- and stopped. I scurried downstairs to it, shaking and hoping desperately that I wouldn't blow myself up in the course of using it a second time. By the time I got to the machine, it had stopped caterwauling. I charged the all-directional dial over ten times and got no response. Therefore, according to the anthropometer manual, nothing human was moving about anywhere in the entire Solar System. I had keyed the machine to myself clectrocephalographically so that I wouldn't set off the alarm. Yet the alarm had gone off, indisputably recording the presence of humanityother than myself, however temporary its existence had been. It was very puzzling. My conclusion is that some atmospheric disturbance or faulty connection inside the anthropometer set the machine off. Or possibly, in my great joy over being left behind a few days ago, I carelessly damaged the apparatus. I heard the Affirmer scout ship radio the news of the capture of my colleagues to a mother vessel waiting beyond Pluto: I know I'm the sole survivor on Earth. Besides, if it had been skulking Affirmers who set the alarm off, their own anthropometer would have detected me at the same time, since I had been walking about unprotected by the insulating effect have been surrounded by flyball crews and I'd have been caught almost immediately. No, I cannot believe I have anything more to fear from Affirmers. They have satisfied themselves with their last-moment return of two days ago, I am positive. Their doctrine would forbid any further returns, since they would be risking their own lives. After all, there are only # days left -- at most -- before the sun goes nova. M AY #, # -- I am deeply disturbed. In fact, I am frightened. And the worst of it is, I do not know of what. All I can do now is wait. Yesterday, I left die Museum of Modern Astronautics for a preliminary tour of the world. I planned to spend two or three weeks hopping about in my flyball before I made any decision about where I would stay for the bulk of my year. My first error was the choice of a first destination. Italy. It is very possible that, if my little problem had not come up, I would have spent eleven months there before going on with my preliminary survey. The Mediterranean is a dangerous and sticky body of water to anyone who has decided that, his own talents being inadequate or aborted, he may most fittingly spend his life cherishing the masterpieces presented to humanity by other, much more fortunate individuals. I went to Ferrara first, since the marshy, reclaimed plain outside the city was a major Affirmcr launching site. I lingered a little while at one of my favorite buildings, the Palazzo dei Diamanti, shaking my head as helplessly as ever at the heavy building stones of which it is constructed and w'hich are cut and faceted like so many enormous jewels. To my mind, the city itself is a jewel, now somewhat dulled, that sparkled madly in the days of the Este court. One little city, one tiny, arrogant court -- I would so happily have traded them for the two billion steadfastly boorish Affirmcrs. Over sixty years of almost unchallenged political control, and did an entire planctful of them produce a single competitor for a Tasso or an Ariosto? And then I realized that at least one native Ferraran would have felt at ease in the world that . has just departed from me, its last romantic. I remembered that Savonarola had been born in Ferrara... The plain outside Ferrara also reminded me of the dour Dominican. The launching field, stretching away for quite a few flat miles, was strewn with enough possessions discarded at the last moment to make a truly towering Bonfire of Vanities. But what pathetic vanities! Here, a slide rule that some ship's commander had ordered thrown out before takeoff because the last inspection had revealed it to be in excess of what the Ship-Classification Manual listed as the maximum number of slide rules necessary for a vessel of that size. There, a mimeographed collection of tally sheets that had been dropped out of the closing air lock after every last item had been checked off as per regulations -- one check before the item by the Ministry of Survival and Preservation, and one check after the item by the Ministry of The Journey. Soiled clothing, somewhat worn implements, empty fuel and food drums lay about on the moist ground. Highly functional articles all, that had somehow come in the course of time to sin against function -- and had fallen swiftly from use. And, surprisingly, an occasional doll, not looking very much like a doll to be sure, but not looking like anything that had an objective purpose either. Looking about me at the squalid debris dotted so rarely with sentiment, I wondered how many parents had writhed with shame when, despite their carefully repeated admonitions and advance warnings, the last search had discovered something in the recesses of a juvenile tunic that could only be called an old toy -- or, worse yet, a keepsake. I remembered what my recreational adviser had said on that subject, long years ago. "It's not that we believe that children shouldn't have toys, Fiyatil; we just don't want them to become attached to any particular toy. Our race is going to leave this planet that's been its home from the beginning. We'll be able to take with us only such creatures and objects as are usable to make other creatures and objects which we'll need for sustenance wherever we come down. And because we can't carry more than so much weight in each ship, we'll have to select from among the usable objects those which are essential. "We won't take anything along because it's pretty, or because a lot of people swear by it, or because a lot of people think they need it. We'll take it along only because nothing else will do an important job so well. That's why I come to your home every month or so to inspect your room, to make certain that your bureau drawers contain only new things, that you're not falling into dangerous habits of sentimentality that can lead only to Custodianism. You've got far too nice a set of folks to turn into that kind of person." Nonetheless, I chuckled to myself, I had turned into that kind of person. Old Tobletej had been right: the first step on the road to ruin had been bureau drawers crammed with odds and ends of memory. The twig on which had sat the first butterfly I'd ever caught, the net with which I'd caught him, and the first butterfly himself. The wad of paper that a certain twelve-year-old lady had thrown at me. A tattered copy of a real printed book -- no facsimile broadcast, this, but something that had once known the kiss of type instead of the hot breath of electrons. The small wooden model of Captain Karma's starship, Man's Hope, which an old spacchand at the Lunar Line launching field had given me along with much misinformation... Those paunc hy bureau drawers! How my parents and teachers had tried to teach me neatness and a hatred of possessions! And here w'as I, now grown into man's estate, smug over my possession of a quantity of artistic masterpieces the like of which no Holy Roman Emperor, no Grand Khan, would have dared to dream about. started looking for the launching site robots. They were scattered about, almost invisible in the unimportant garbage of the spaceship field. After loading the ship, they had simply wandered about until they had run down. I activated them once more and set them to cleaning the field. This is something I will do in every one of the two hundred or so launching sites on Earth, and this is the chief reason I have been studying robotics. I want Earth to look as pretty as possible when she dies. I never could be an Affirmcr, I am afraid; I form strong attachments. Feeling as I did, I just couldn't continue on my trip without taking the quickest, the most cursory glance at Florence. Naturally. But as I should have expected, I got drunk on oil and marble and metalwork. Florence was empty of Florentines, but the glorious galleries were still there. I walked across the fine Ponte Vecchio, the only one of the famous Arno bridges to have escaped destruction in the Second World War. I came to Giotto's campanile and the baptistery doors by Ghiberti and I began to feel despair, desperation. I ran to the Church of Santa Croce to see Giotto's frescoes and the Convent of St. Mark's for Fra Angelico. What good was one year, what could I see of even a single city like this in a bare twelve months? I could view, I could gallop by, but what would I have time to sec? I was in the Boboli gardens trying frantically to decide whether to look up Michelangelo's David which I'd seen once before, or some Donatello which I hadn't, when the alarms went off. Both of them. The day before I'd left, I'd put together a small anthropometer tnat had originally been developed for locating lost colonists in the Venusian swamps. It was based on an entirely different design than the big machine that I'd found in the Hall of Gadgets. Since the circuits were unalike. and they had been planned for use in entirely different atmospheres, I believed they would serve as excellent checks on each other. I'd set the alarms to the frequency of my flyball communicator and had left the museum fairly confident that the only thing that could make both anthropometers go off would be the presence of a man other than myself. I flew back to the Museum, feeling very confused. Both pieces of equipment had responded the same way. The alarm had gone off, indicating the sudden materialization of Man on the planet. Then, when the stimulus had disappeared, both alarms had stopped. No matter howmany times I charged die directional dials on each anthropometer, there was not the faintest suspicion of mankind within their extreme range, which is a little under one- half of a light-year. The initial confusion has given w-ay to a strong feeling of discomfort. Something is very wrong here on Earth, something different than the sun getting ready to explode in a year. Possibly I have the nontechnician's blind faith in a piece of apparatus which I don't fully understand, but I don't believe that the anthropometers should be acting this way unless something really abnormal is occurring. It has pleased me to look upon this planet as an ocean-going ship about to sink, and myself as the gallant captain determined to go down with her. Abruptly, I feel as if the ship were beginning to act like a w'hale. I know what I must do. I'll move a supply of food down to the Hall of Gadgets and sleep right under the anthropometers. The alarm usually lasts for a minute or two. I can leap to my feet, charge the alldirection dials and get enough of a reading right then to know exactly where the stimulus is coming from. Then I will pop into my flyball and investigate. It's really very simple. Only, I don't like it M AY #, # -- I feel thoroughly ashamed of myself as only an old man who has been seeing ghosts in the graveyard should be ashamed. That, in fact, is the only excuse I can make to myself. I have, I suppose, been thinking too much about death recently. The coming extinction of Earth and the Solar System, my death which is inevitably involved with it, the counted species, the death of proud old cities that Man has reared and occupied for centuries... Well, perhaps the association with ghosties and beasties and other strange phenomena is understandable. When the alarms went off again this morning, I got a directional reading. My destination was the Appalachian Mountain region in eastern North America. The moment I got out of the flyball and took in the pale azure fog covering the cave mouth in front of me, I began to understand -- and feel ashamed. Through the fog, which thinned in one place and thickened in others as I watched, I could see several bodies lying on the floor of the cave. Obviously, one of them had to be alive for the anthropometer to have reacted as soon as enough to make the presence of a human mind detectable. I walked around to the back of the cave and found no exit. I went back to the museum in the flyball and returned with the necessary equipment. I deactivated the walked inside cautiously. The interior of the cave, which had evidently been furnished as a domestic and comfortable hideout, was completely wrecked. Somebody had managed to get an activator as which had not yet been given any particular shape and which, therefore, was about as stable as hydrogen and oxygen -- if it is permissable to use a metaphor from chemistry to illustrate negative force-field been activated as a sort of curtain across the mouth of the cave and had blown up immediately. But, since the activator was still operating and the entrance was fairly narrow, it continued to function as a curtain of insulating negative force, a curtain which had holes in it through which one could occasionally "peek" by means of the anthropometer at the people imprisoned inside. There were three bodies near the entrance, two male and one female, rather youthful-looking. From the quantity and type of statuary on the walls of the cave, it was easy to deduce that these people had belonged to one of the many numerous religious Custodian groups, probably the Fire in the Heavens cult. When, in the last week of the exodus, the Affirmcrs had denounced the Crohiik Agreement and stated that the Affirmation of Life required that even those who didn't Affirm had to be protected against themselves, these people had evidently taken to the mountains. Evading the subsequent highly effective search, they had managed to stay hidden until the last great vessel left. Then, suspecting as I had that at least one scout ship would return for a final round-up, they had investigated the properties of the anthropometer and found out about the only insulator, berrillit blue. Unfortunately, they had not found out enough. Deep in the rear of the cave, a body twisted brokenly to meet me. It was a young woman. My first reaction was absolute astonishment at the fact that she was still alive. The explosion seemed to have smashed her thoroughly below the waist. She had crawled from the cave mouth to the interior where the group had stored most of their food and water. As I teetered, momentarily undecided whether to leave her and get medication and blood plasma from a hospital in the region or to risk moving her immediately, she rolled over on her back. She had been covering a year-old infant with her body, evidently unblow again. And somehow, in spite of what must have been tremendous agony, she had been feeding the child. I bent down and examined the baby. He was quite dirty and covered with his mother's blood, but otherwise unharmed. I picked him up and, in answer to the question in the woman's eyes, I nodded. "He'll be all right," I said. She started what niav have been a nod in reply and stopped halfway through to die. I examined her carefully and, I will admit, a shade frantically. There was no pulse -- no heartbeat. I took the child back to the museum and constructed a sort of play pen for him out of empty telescope sections. Then I went back to the cave with three robots and had the people buried. I admit the gesture was superfluous, but it wasn't only a matter of neatness. However fundamental our differences, we were all of Custodian persuasion, generally speaking. It somehow made me feel as if I were snapping my fingers in the face of the entire smug Affirmation to respect their Firc-inHcarsfi eccentricities in this fashion. After the robots had completed their work, I placed a piece of the religious statuary (it was remarkably badly done, by the way) at the head of each grave and even said a short prayer, or rather a sermon. I developed the thought that I had suggested approximately a week earlier to some deer -- to wit, that in the midst of life we arc in death. I did not joke about it, however, but spoke seriously on the subject for several minutes. The robots who were my audience seemed even less excited by the intelligence than the deer had been. Which is understandable. M AY #, # -- I am annoyed. I am very, very annoyed and my great problem at the moment is that I lack an object on which to expend my annoyance. The child has been an incredible amount of trouble. I took him to the largest medical museum in the northern hemisphere and had him thoroughly examined by the best pediatric diagnostic machinery. He seems to be in excellent health, which is fortunate for both of us. And his dietarv # requirements, while not the same as mine, are fairly simple. I got a full tape on the kind of food he needs and, after a few readjustments in the commissar)' of the Museum of Modem Astronautics, I have arranged for this food to be prepared and delivered to him daily. Unfortunately, he does not seem to regard this arrangement, which took up an inordinate amount of my time, as wholly satisfactory. For one thing, he will not accept food from the regulation robot nursemaid which I have activated for him. This, I suspect, is because of his parents' odd beliefs: he probably has never encountered mechanical affection before. He will only cat when I feed him. That situation alone is intolerable, but I have found it almost impossible to leave him guarded by the robot nursemaid. Though he does little more than crawl, he manages to do this at a surprisingly fast pace and is always disappearing into dark corridors of the museum. Then an alarm is flashed to me and I have to break off my examination of the gigantic palace of the Dalai Lama, the Potala, and come scudding back from Lhasa halfway across the world to the Museum. Even then it would take us hours to find him -- and by "us" I mean every robot at my disposal -- if I were not able to resort to the anthropometer. This admirable gadget points out his hiding place very swiftly; and so, pulling him out of the firing chamber of the Space Howitzer in the Hall of Weapons, I return him to his playpen. Then, if I dare, and if it is not time for him to be fed, I mayreturn -- briefly -- to the Tibetan plateau. I am at present engaged in constructing a sort of enormous cage for him, with automatic heating and toilet facilities and devices that will screen out undesirable animals, insects and reptiles. Though this is taking up far too much of my time, it will be an excellent investment, I believe. I don't know quite what to do about the feeding problem. The only solution I can find in any of the literature on the subject that offers promise is the one about letting him go hungry if he refuses food from normal sources. After a brief experiment, however, in which he seemed cheerfully resigned to starvation, I was forced to give in. I now handle every one of his meals. The trouble is that I don't know whom to blame. Since I have been a Custodian from early manhood, I failed to see the need to reproduce. I have never been interested even slightly in children. I know very little about them and care less. I have always felt that my attitude was admirably summed up by Socrates' comments in the Symposium: "Who, upon reflecting on Homer and Hesiod and other such great poets, would not rather have their children than ordinary human ones? Who would not like to emulate them in the creation of children such as theirs, which have preserved their memory and given them everlasting glory?... Many are the temples which have been raised in their honor for the sake of such children as they have had, which were never raised in honor of anyone for the sake of his mortal children." Unfortunately, we are the only two humans alive on Earth, this child and I. We are going to our doom together; we ride the same round tumbril. And the treasures of the world which were wholly mine less than a week ago now belong at least partially to him. I wish we could discuss the matters at issue, not only to arrive at more equitable arrangements, but also for the sheer pleasure of the discussion. I have come to the conclusion that I began this journal out of unconscious terror when I discovered, after the Affirmers left, that Iwas completely alone. I find myself getting very wistful for conversation, for ideas other than my own, for opinions against which mine might be measured. Yet according to the literature on the subject, while this child might begin talking any day now, we will be immersed in catastrophe long before he learns to argue with me. I find that sad, however inevitable. How I wander! The fact is that once again I am being prevented from studying art as I would like. I am an old man and should have no responsibilities; I have all but laid down my life for the privilege of this study. It is extremely vexing. And conversation. I can just imagine the kind of conversation I might be having with an Affirmer at the moment, were one to have been stranded here with me. What dullness, what single-minded biological idiocy! What crass refusal to look at, let alone admit, the beauty his species has been seventy millennia in the making! The most he might have learned if he is a European, say, is a bit about the accepted artists of his culture. What would he know of Chinese painting, for example, or cave art? Would he be able to understand that in eaGh there were primitive periods followed by eras of lusty development, followed in turn by a consolidation of artistic gains and an increase in formalization, the whole to be rounded off by a decadent, inner-groping epoch which led almost invariably into another primitive and lusty period? That these have occurred again and again in the major cultures so that even the towering genius of a Michelangelo, a Shakespeare, a Beethoven will likely be repeated -- in somewhat different terms -- in another complete cycle? That there was a Michelangelo, Shakespeare and Beethoven in each of several different "flower periods" in ancient Egyptian art? How could an Affirmer understand such concepts when he lacks the basic information necessary to understanding? When their ships departed from the moribund solar system laden only with immediately usable artifacts? When they refused to let their offspring keep childhood treasures for fear of developing sentimentality, so that when thev came to colonize Profor either the world that has died or the puppy that has been left behind? And yet history plays such incredible jokes on Man! They who ran away from their museums, who kept nothing but a cold microfilm record of what lay in their investment houses of culture, will learn that Man's sentimentality is not to be frustrated. The bleak, efficient ships that brought them to these alien worlds will become museums of the past as they oxidize out of existence on the strange sands. Their cruelly functional lines will become the inspiration for temples and alcoholic tears. What in the world is happening to me? How I run on! After all, I merely wanted to explain why I was annoyed... M AY #, # -- I have made several decisions. I don't know if I will be able to implement the most important of them, but I will try. In order, however, to give myself what I need most at the moment -- time -- I will write much less in this journal, if I write any more at all. I will try very hard to be brief. To begin with die least important decision: I have named the child Leonardo. Why I chose to name him after a man who, for all of his talents -- in fact, because of his talents -- I regard as the most spectacular failure in the history of art, I do not know. But Leonardo was a well-rounded man, something which the Affirmers are not -- and something which I am beginning to admit I am not. By the way, the child recognizes his name. He is not yet able to pronounce it, but it is positively miraculous the way he recognizes it. And he makes a sound which is very like mine. In fact, I might say -- Let me go on. I have decided to attempt an escape from the Earth -- with Leonardo. My reasons are many and complex, and I'm not certain that I understand them all, but one thing I do know. I have felt responsibility for a life other than my own and can no longer evade it. This is not a tardy emergence into Affirmer doctrine, but in a very real sense my own ideas come to judgment. Since I believe in the reality of beauty, especially beauty made with the mind and hands of man, I can follow no other course. I am an old man and will achieve little with the rest of my life. Leonardo is an infant: he represents raw potential; he might become anything. A song beyond Shakespeare's. A thought above Newton, above Einstein. Or an evil beyond Gilles dc Retz, a horror past Hitler. Or sheer mediocrity. Or quiet, unostentatious usefulness. But the potential should be realized. I think, under my tutelage, it is less likely to be evil and there I have a potential to be realized. In any case, even if Leonardo represents a zero personally, he may carry the germ-plasm of a Buddha, of a Euripides, of a Freud. And that potential must be realized... There is a ship. Its name is Man's Hope and it was the first ship to reach the stars, almost a century ago when it had just been discovered that our sun would explode and become a nova in a little less than a hundred years. It was the ship that discovered for Man the heart-quickening fact that other stars have planets and that many of those planets are habitable to him. It was a long time ago that Captain Karma brought his starship back down on the soil of Earth with the news that escape was possible. That was long before I was born, long before humanity divided unequally into Custodian and Affirmer and long, long before either group were the unwinking fanatics they had become five years agThe ship is in the Museum of Modern Astronautics. I know it has been kept in good condition. I also know that twenty years ago, before the Aflirmers had developed the position that absolutely nothing might be taken physically from a museum, the ship was equipped with the latest Lcugio Drive. The motive was that, if it were needed on Exodus Day, it might make the trip to a star in months instead of years or centuries. The only thing that I do not know is whether I, Fiyatil, the Custodian of Custodians and art critic extraordinary, can learn to run it in the time that Leonardo and I have left. But as one of my favorite comic characters remarked about the possibility of a man chopping his own head off : a man can try... There is something else on my mind, even more exciting in a way, but this comes first. I find myself looking at the Sun a good deal these days. And very scarchingly, too. Very. N ovember n, # -- i can do it. With the help of two robots which I will modify for the purpose, I can do it. Leonardo and I could leave immediately. But I have my other project to complete. And this is my other project. I am going to use all the empty space in the ship. It was built originally for different motors and a very large crew, and I am going to use that space as a. bureau drawer. Into that bureau drawer I will stuff the keepsakes of humanity, the treasures of its childhood and adolescence -- at least as many as I will he able to get in. For weeks I have been collecting treasures from all over the world. Incredible pottery, breath-taking friezes, glorious statuary and oil paintings almost beyond counting litter the corridors of the museum. Brueghel is piled on Bosch, Bosch piled on Durer. I am going to bring a little of everything to that star toward which I point my ship, a little to show what the real things were like. I am including things like the holograph manuscripts of Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, Gogol's Dead Souls, Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn . and holographs of Dickens' letters and Lincoln's speeches. There arc many others, but I cannot takt everything. Within responsible limits, I must please myself . Therefore, I am not taking anything from the Sislinc Chapel ceiling. I have instead carved out two bits of the Last Judgment instead. They arc my favorites: the soul that suddenly realizes that it is condemned, and the Hayed skin on which Michelangelo painted his own portrait. The only trouble is that fresco weighs so much! Weight, weight, weight -- it is almost all I think about now. Even Leonardo follows me about and says "Weight, weight, weight!" He pronounces nothing else so well. Still, what should I take of Picasso? A handful of oils, yes, but I must take the. Guernica. And there is more weight. I have some wonderful Russian copper utensils and some Ming bronze bowls. I have a lime spatula from Eastern New Guinea made of oiled wood that has a delightfully carved handle (it was used in chewing betel nut and lime). I have a wonderful alabaster figure of a cow from ancient Sumer. I have an incredible silver Buddha from northern India. I have some Dahomean brass figures of a grace to shame Egypt and Greece. I have a carved ivory container from Benin, West Africa, showing a thoroughly Fifteenth Century European Christ on the cross. I have the "Venus" of Willendorf, Austria, the figure that was carved in the Aurignacian epoch of the paleolithic and which is part of the artistic tradition of the "Venus" art of prehistoric mankind. and Holbein, satiric prints by Hogarth, a beautiful Kangra painting of the eighteenth century on paper that shows little Mughal influence, Japanese prints by Takamaru and Hiroshige -- and where may I stop? How may I choose? I have pages from the Book of Kells, which is an illuminated hand-executed manuscript of almost unmatched beauty; and I have pages from the Gutenberg Bible which is the first book printed from movable type and which has illuminated pages to give the effect of a hand-copied manuscript, because the printers didn't want their invention discovered. I have a tughra of Sulaiman the Magnificent, a calligraphic emblem that formed headings for his imperial edicts; and I have a Hebrew Scroll of the Law whose calligraphy outshines the jewels which encrust the poles on which it is wound. I have Coptic textiles of the sixth century and Alengon lace of the sixteenth. I have a magnificent red krater vase from one of Athens' maritime colonies and a wooden figurehead of a minister from a New England frigate. I have a Rubens nude and an Odalisque by Matisse. In architecture -- I am taking the Chinese Compendium of Architecture which I think has never been equalled as a text and a model of a Le Corbusier house built by him. I would love to take one building, the Taj Mahal, but I am taking the pearl that the Mogul gave to her for whom he built the ineffable tomb. It is a reddish pearl, shaped like a pear and about three and a half inches long; shortly after it w-as buried with her, it turned up in the possession of an Emperor of China who set it on gold leaves and surrounded it with jade and emeralds. At the turn of the nineteenth century, it was sold somewhere in the Near East for a tiny, ridiculous sum and ended in the Louvre. And a tool: a small stone fistaxe, the first thing known to have been made by human creatures. All this I have collected near the ship. But I've sorted none of it. And I suddenly remember, I have collected as yet no furniture, no decorated weapons, no etched glass... I must hurry, hurry! N ovember # -- shortly after I finished the last entry, I glanced upward. There were green specks on the sun and strange orange streamers seemed to plume out to all points of the compass. Evidently there was not to be a year. These were the symptoms of death that the astronomers had predicted. So there was an end to my collecting -- and my sorting was done in less than a day. The one thing I suddenly found I had to do, when it became obvious that my sections of Michelangelo would be too heavy, was to go to the Sistine Chapel ceiling after all. This time I cut out a relatively tiny thing -- the finger of the Creation as it stabs life into Adam. And I decided to take Da Vinci's La Gioconda after all, even though his Beatrice d'Este is more to my taste: the Mona Lisa's smile belongs to the world. All posters are represented by one Toulouse-Lautrec. I dropped the Guernica: Picasso is represented instead by an oil from his blue period and a single striking ceramic plate. I dropped Harold Paris' The Eternal Judgment because of its bulk: all I have of his now is the print Burchcnwald # # , "Where Are We Going?" And somehow or other, in my last-minute haste, I seem to have selected a large number of Safavid bottles from Iran of future historians and psychologists puzzle out the reasons for my choices: they are now irrevocable. We are proceeding toward Alpha Ccntauri and should arrive in five months. How will we and all our treasures be received, I wonder? I suddenly feel insanely cheerful. I don't think it has anything to do with my rather belated realization that I, who have so little talent and have failed so miserably in the arts, will achieve a place in the history of art like no other man -- a kind of esthetic Noah. No, it is the fact that I am carrying both the future and the past to a rendezvous where they still have a chance to come to terms. A moment ago Leonardo bounced a ball against the visiplate and, looking at it, I observed that old Sol was expanding apoplertically. As I remarked to him then: "I find, to my astonishment, that in the midst of death, I am -- at last, at last! -- truly in life." IF grows up and goes monthly with the March issue, on sale January #th. We hope you'll be on hand for every new issue!... Watch for further announcements. See So Evil Froman was a totally un-mad scientist ; if anything , he was too sane for his own good. That spark on the moon intrigued him -- why shouldn't he investigate it? By Dean McLaughlin Illustrated by Paul Oban know there was anyone but himself in the observatory until he # heard somebody open the door to the dome, and then the hollowmetallic sound of feet on the enclosed, steep stairway which hugged the curve of the outside wall. Perhaps, Froman thought, it was Jameson. working late in his office and coining up for a chat. But that possibility. he had to admit, was unlikely; an astronomer on visual ob servation is not particularly disposed to conversation. There was too much to concentrate upon, without talking. And everyone knew what lie was doing tonight: it was there on the work schedule. He frowned, leaned back from the telescope's eyepiece, and looked across the dome to the stairhead. A man in a brown checked overcoat emerged from the stairwell, taking each step heavily as hi came. The light on the wall nearby icvealed him as a mass of form and shadow. Except for the dull red glow over the switchboard panel, it was the only illumination in the dome. That and the Hood of moonlight pouring through the open slot in the hemispheric roof. Froman did not recognize the man; certainly, he was no one in the department. And no one else had any business here at this hour of the night. The stranger's hat brim cast a shadow over most of his face, revealing only the tip of his nose and tire chin which was giving way gradually to plumpness. But even the heavy overcoat could not disguise the man's build: he ate a little too much, and exercised not quite enough. He paused a moment at the head of the stairs, with the lone light behind and to the right of his shoulder. He stood there, feet placed firmly, peering across the darkened dome. Then, as his eyes adjusted to the dimness, he saw Froman at the telescope and came across the floor. His footsteps thudded hollowly as he passed over the hatchway used for bringing up heavy equipment. Froman watched him come, and, when he was near, said, "How did you get in?" "I had a key," the man answered offhandedly. "You're Charles Froman, aren't you?" His tone irnmediatcly challenged any denial. When Froman nodded, the man reached inside his coat and brought cut a wallet. Propping it open with his 'thumb, he offered it to the astronomer for inspection. "The name's Mackey. I'm from Military Security. On business." His voice dean McLaughlin echoed strangely in the dome, and the way he said "Military Security" included capitalization. Because it was dark in the dome, Froman could not see the card in the wallet until he flashed a penlitc on it. The card only repeated the man's claims. Froman turned the beam on the man's face. The security agent blinked heavy eyelids, then squinted from under overhanging brows. Froman snapped ofT the penlitc and returned it to the inside pocket of his suitcoat. underneath the shabby overcoat he wore against the cold of waning autumn. "I don't quite see what you'd want with me," he said uncertainly. "We're the ones who'll decide that," Mackey answered shortly. "I just want to talk to you." Froman had bent over the telescope's eyepiece, but now he looked up again. "What about?" "Let's just say we're interested in your work." "But this is hardly the time -- " The agent didn't let him finish. "The fewer the people who know about my coming here, the better. They might guess too much. And no one will interrupt us this time of night, cither." He jammed his hands in his coat pockets, defending them against the cold. "This is a confidential visit," he went on. "We don't want anyone to know, and you aren't to repeat anything about it. Not anything. You understand?" "I suppose so. But I still don't understand what you want with me. All I do is teach a few classes and some research. What's that got to do with... Military Security?" He sounded puzzled. He was. "The less you know, the better we'll all feel," Mackey told him evasively. He continued, carefully deciding exactly what he wanted to say before saying it. "There's some question about how much you know, and if you know' less than we're afraid you do, we'd rather this visit didn't tell you more." "In other words, I'm to be quizzed about something I don't know." "We're sure you know something. The question is: how much?" The agent hunched his shoulders against the cold. "Look. Can't we go somewhere else and talk? It's cold up here." "It's always cold here in the winter," Froman answered. "We get used to it." "Well, I'm not used to it." "I didn't ask you to come. If you prefer, you can come to my office tomorrow afternoon. You can talk to me then." "We'll talk now. The longer it's put off, the more danger there is." "I'm busy right now." "We're not in the habit of waiting" "Half of astronomy is waiting for something to happen," Froman said. He was trying to be patient. "And when it does, an astronomer doesn't like to be interrupted. You can wait a little while -- what goes on in the sky doesn't." "How long will it take you?" the agent grumbled. "That depends. You might say I'm waiting for something I think might happen. If I do see something tonight, I might be quite a while." He looked straight at Macke v. # The security agent swung away. There wasn't much point in arguing with the man. ' Mind if I smoke?" "No. Go ahead," F roman answered. He added pointedly, "There's an ashtrav on the table # over there." He waved a hand toward the well-used table standing beside the larger of the two piers which supported the telescope. The red glow of the lamp on the switchboard mounted against the larger pier fell on the twin-bladed knife switches and the table below it. Mackey found the ashtray -- a very small one -- on one corner ol the table, most of which was occupied by a stack of photographic plates, a small radio, and an electrically driven sidereal clock and # red spotlight combination. Sullenly, the agent lit up and waited. lie glowered resentfully at the nolonger-used pendulum clock on the far side of the switchboard. Charles Froman dismissed the agent from his thoughts as he bent over the telescope's eyepiece. Besides his ancient overcoat he wore a fur-lined cap with car flaps, and for the most part kept his hands in his pockets. He sat crouched on the adjustable-height seat mounted on a wooden frame resembling a relic of the Spanish Inquisition. The moon was large under the magnification of the #-inch reflector. Froman could onlv see a small fraction of it at a time. But he only wanted to see one spot, an area shaped like a circle and just ninety miles across. It was in the center of his field of vision, a low-walled. eroded crater without a central peak, having a fairly level interior broken by only one or two secondary craters of any appreciable size. Under the lunar noon, the features were not very obvious -- there was 
